ERAS GuidelineConsensus statement for perioperative care in lumbar spinalfusion: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS)Society recommendationsBertrand Debono, MD*,a,b, Thomas W. Wainwright, PTc,d,Michael Y. Wang, MD, FACSe, Freyr G. Sigmundsson, MD, PhDf,Michael M.H. Yang, MD, MSc, M.Biotechg, Henri?ette Smid-Nanninga, MSch,Aurelien Bonnal, MDi, Jean-Charles Le Huec, MD, PhDj,William J. Fawcett, MD, FRCAk, Olle Ljungqvist, MD, PhDl,Guillaume Lonjon, MD, PhDm, Hans D. de Boer, MD, PhDna Paris-Versailles Spine Center (Centre Francilien du Dos), Paris, France b Ramsay Sante-H opital Priv ^ e de Versailles, Versailles, France  c Research Institute, Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, UK d The Royal Bournemouth and Christchurch Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Bournemouth, Bournemouth, UK e Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA fDepartment of Orthopedic Surgery, Orebro University Hospital, S ? odra Grev Rosengatan, ? Orebro, Sweden ?g Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Section of Neurosurgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada h Scientific Institute, Martini General Hospital Groningen, the Netherlands iDepartment of Anesthesiology, Clinique St-Jean- Sud de France, Santecit  e Group. St Jean de Vedas, Montpellier Metropole,FrancejDepartment of Orthopedic Surgery - Polyclinique Bordeaux Nord Aquitaine, Bordeaux, France k Department of Anaesthesia, Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, UK lSchool of Medical Sciences, Department of Surgery, Orebro University, ? Orebro, Sweden ?m Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Orthosud, Clinique St-Jean- Sud de France, SanteCit  e Group. St Jean de Vedas,Montpellier Metropole, France n Department of Anesthesiology, Pain Medicine and Procedural Sedation and Analgesia, Martini General Hospital Groningen,the NetherlandsReceived 30 August 2020; revised 2 December 2020; accepted 4 January 2021Abstract BACKGROUND: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) evidence-based protocols for perioperative care have led to improvements in outcomes in numerous surgical areas, through multimodal optimization of patient pathway, reduction of complications, improved patient experienceand reduction in the length of stay. ERAS represent a relatively new paradigm in spine surgery.PURPOSE: This multidisciplinary consensus review summarizes the literature and proposes recommendations for the perioperative care of patients undergoing lumbar fusion surgery with anERAS program.FDA device/drug status: not applicable.Author Disclosures: BD: Consulting: Medtronic (B), Spineart (B), Codman Integralife (A), Baxter (A); Speaking and/or teaching arrangements:Medtronic (B), Spineart (B), Codman Integralife (B), Baxter (B), Bard BD(B); Scientific Advisory Board/Other Office: Scientific Advisory Board forSpineart. TWW: Consulting: Zimmer-Biomet (D), Depuy-Synthes (B),Firstkind Ltd (F); Grants: Zimmer-Biomet (F), Stryker (F). MYW: Consulting fee or honorarium: Depuy-Synthes Spine (E), Spineology(C),Stryker (D); Royalties: Children¡¦s Hospital of Los Angeles (C), DepuySynthes Spine (F), Springer Publishing (A), Quality Medical Publishing(A); Stock Ownership: Innovative Surgical Devices (C), Medical DevicePartners (C); Consulting: Depuy-Synthes Spine (E), Spineology (C),Stryker (D); Speaking and/or Teaching Arrangements: Medtronic (C),Globus (B). FGS: Nothing to disclose. MMHY: Nothing to disclose.HSN: Nothing to disclose. AB: Nothing to disclose. JCLH: Nothing todisclose. WJF: Royalities: Cambridge University Press (A). OL: Stockownership: Encare AB (G); Consulting: Encare AB (C), Nutricia (B);Speaking and/or teaching arrangements: Encare AB (B), BBraun (A), Fresenius-Kabi (A); Trips/Travel: Encare AB (B), BBraun (A), FreseniusKabi (A). GL: Nothing to disclose. HDB: Board of directors: TreasurerERAS_ Society; Grants: Research grant Merck (A).Funding: No financial support was received for this study.*Corresponding author. Paris-Versailles Spine Center (Centre Franciliendu Dos), Ramsay Sante-H^opital Prive de Versailles, 7bis rue de la Porte deBuc, 78000, Versailles, France. Tel.: 0033686848107.E-mail address: bdebono@gmail.com (B. Debono).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2021.01.0011529-9430/ý 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752STUDY DESIGN: This is a review article.METHODS: Under the impetus of the ERAS society, a multidisciplinary guideline developmentgroup was constituted by bringing together international experts involved in the practice of ERASand spine surgery. This group identified 22 ERAS items for lumbar fusion. A systematic search inthe English language was performed in MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register ofControlled Trials. Systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, and cohort studies wereincluded, and the evidence was graded according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system. Consensus recommendation was reached by thegroup after a critical appraisal of the literature.RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-six articles were included to develop the consensus statements for22 ERAS items; one ERAS item (prehabilitation) was excluded from the final summary due tovery poor quality and conflicting evidence in lumbar spinal fusion. From these remaining 21 ERASitems, 28 recommendations were included. All recommendations on ERAS protocol items arebased on the best available evidence. These included nine preoperative, eleven intraoperative, andsix postoperative recommendations. They span topics from preoperative patient education andnutritional evaluation, intraoperative anesthetic and surgical techniques, and postoperative multimodal analgesic strategies. The level of evidence for the use of each recommendation is presented.CONCLUSION: Based on the best evidence available for each ERAS item within the multidisciplinary perioperative care pathways, the ERAS Society presents this comprehensive consensusreview for perioperative care in lumbar fusion. ý 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)Keywords: Enhanced recovery after surgery; Perioperative care; Fast-track surgery; ERAS; Spine surgery; Lumbar fusion;Minimally invasive spine surgery; Degenerative spine disease; Evidence-based recommendationsIntroductionPopularized by Henrik Kehlet in the 1990s [1], a multimodal approach of perioperative management, includingnutrition and analgesia, called ¡§Fast-Track Surgery,¡¨ wasintroduced. This later developed into what is now known asEnhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) program, an evidence-based approach to perioperative care, aimed to enhancerecovery [2]. In 2010, the ERAS Society was formed andhas since then produced a range of consensus guidelines forseveral surgeries (http://www.erassociety.org). The maingoals of ERAS are the improvement of surgical outcomes,reduction of complications, improved patient experience, andreduction in the length of stay (LOS) [3,4]. ERAS programshave been successfully implemented in different areas of surgery and offer results that justify the growing corpus of publications surrounding this paradigm [5].The improved knowledge of spinal biomechanics togetherwith the increasing age of our population, improved imagingdiagnostics, technical advances (implants and minimallyinvasive technologies), initial training of physicians (orthopedic and neurosurgeons), as well as medico-economic andsocietal factors, have led to an increase in the number of lumbar fusion surgeries over the past few decades [6?10]. Furthermore, the increased complexity of these proceduresincreases the risk of postoperative complications and delayedrecovery [11?14]. Lumbar surgery has been rated as one ofthe most painful procedures [15?17], and the subsequentrisk of chronic pain and postoperative opioid dependenceis not negligible [18,19]. There are significant practice variations across institutions and countries in the treatment andperioperative care of patients with degenerative spinal conditions [7,20]. These differences lead to varied perioperativesurgical outcomes, including LOS, postoperative complication rates, and rates of functional recovery [21?25].Therefore, there is a significant clinical and economicrationale for improving the management and outcomes ofthese conditions [26]. Evidence-based standardization ofperioperative management of lumbar fusion patients throughthe implementation of ERAS protocols can lead to improvedoutcomes [26,27]. The literature studying the application ofERAS protocols in spinal surgery is still recent [28?30].However, in this surgical specialty, specific evidence-basedERAS guidelines aiming to reduce perioperative stress, minimize complications, and importantly accelerate the achievement of discharge are lacking. As such, under the impetus ofthe ERAS Society, a multidisciplinary, international working group of ERAS experts was formed to develop evidencebased recommendations for lumbar fusion surgery using theGrading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development,and Evaluation (GRADE) system for rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations [31].MethodsFormation of the guideline development group andselection of guideline topicsThe formation of the guideline development group (GDG)and the selection of guideline topics were performed following the published recommendations for the development ofclinical guidelines within the ERAS Society framework730 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752[32]. The GDG has an international representation consistingof experts involved in the practice of ERAS and spine surgery(orthopedic and neurosurgeons, anesthesiologists, dedicatedERAS nurses, epidemiologists, and physiotherapists). TheGDG was notified that this first set of recommendationsdevoted to spine surgery would focus on lumbar fusions,effectively excluding cervical spine surgery, anteriorapproaches, and complex deformity procedures, particularlyidiopathic scoliosis. The GDG was consulted to advise onappropriate items to be included in the guidelines, with thefinal decision being made by the lead authors (BD, TW,HDB). Once agreed, items were allocated to authors depending on each individual¡¦s expertise. The final paper was agreedupon by all authors.Literature search strategyThe search strategies were created using MESH termand keywords, and searches were carried out inMEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register ofControlled Trials (earliest on record until December2019). No search filters were used to maximize sensitivity.Systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials (RCTs)and observational cohort studies reporting on adults(?18 years) undergoing lumbar spinal fusion surgeryrelated to one of the ERAS topics were included. NonEnglish studies were excluded. It is important to note thatalthough a systematic search was conducted using theERAS Society framework [32], the purpose of this searchwas not to obtain a comprehensive summary of the literature, but rather to ensure that the most relevant information is captured for inclusion in the ERAS guidelines(Fig. 1). The final included studies were carefullyreviewed by the GDG, and any disagreements wereresolved through group consensus. These search strategiesare comprehensively detailed in the Appendix [33].Quality assessment, data analyses, and consensusgenerationThe GRADE system was used to evaluate the quality ofevidence and recommendations for each of the ERAS topics[31]. Recommendations are made based on whether thequality of evidence is high, moderate, low, or very low(Table 1). The strength of the recommendation is based onthe balance between desirable and undesirable effects ofFig. 1. Summary of recommended perioperative topics for ERAS and lumbar fusion.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 731the recommendation. Strong recommendation for an ERASitem is possible even with low quality of evidence if therisk of harm is negligible [34?36] (Table 2). In case of anydisagreements in assessing the quality of evidence andgrading of recommendation statements, the following procedures were performed: (1) this was either resolvedthrough consensus discussions, or (2) when the disagreements persisted, by a Delphi process [37].We were judicious when providing strong recommendations in areas where there was weak procedure-specific evidence to ensure that new nonevidence-based traditionswithin ERAS were not created.ResultsThe electronic database search for the 22 ERAS itemsyielded 66,432 articles. Forty-six thousand one hundred fiftyone abstracts were screened after duplicates were removed.Two hundred fifty-six articles were included in the development of the consensus statement. There was no disagreementbetween the authors in the assessment of the quality of evidence and grading. Therefore, a Delphi process was notneeded. Based on consensus, one ERAS item (prehabilitation)was eliminated due to very poor quality and conflicting evidence in lumbar fusion. From the remaining 21 ERAS items,28 recommendations were made (Table 3).Preoperative recommendationsPreoperative education & counselingCurrent ERAS protocols for spinal surgery all emphasizethe importance of preoperative patient education andcounseling [30,38,39]. This appears appropriate given thatpreoperative information can influence patient expectations,and patients who receive sufficient counseling are likely tohave higher levels of satisfaction than those who receiveinsufficient education [40]. This is especially important sincelumbar surgery may be perceived to have uncertain outcomeswith negative side effects and a considerable recovery period[41]. The uncertainty of outcomes can contribute to preoperative fear and anxiety, which can negatively affect recoveryafter surgery. Combining preoperative education with consistent written patient information materials is, therefore, alsoessential [42].Within the spinal literature, a systematic review including seven RCTs demonstrated limited evidence for preoperative education, counseling, and cognitive interventions toreduce postoperative pain and LOS [43]. Although preoperative education and counseling appears rational for lumbarspine surgery and carries a minimal risk for adverse effects,the evidence substantiating its use is unclear. Recent prognostic tools may improve shared decision making on creating a personalized perioperative treatment strategy toimprove pain outcomes [44]. Further research is needed todetermine the timing, mode of delivery, specific intervention, and specific patients that would benefit most from preoperative education and counseling.Summary/recommendationPreoperative patient education is recommended.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongPrehabilitationPrehabilitation has been described as enhancing functional capacity before surgery [45] to accelerate return toTable 1.GRADE system for rating quality of evidence [31]Evidence level DefinitionHigh quality Further research unlikely to change confidence in estimate of effectModerate quality Further research likely to have important impact on confidence in estimate of effect and may change the estimateLow quality Further research very likely to have important impact on confidence in estimate of effect and likely to change the estimateVery low quality Any estimate of effect is very uncertainGRADE, grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation.Table 2.GRADE system for rating strength of recommendations [31]RecommendationStrengthDefinitionStrong When desirable effects of intervention clearly outweigh the undesirable effects, or clearly do notWeak When trade-offs are less certain¡Xeither because of low-quality evidence or because evidence suggests desirable and undesirableeffects are closely balancedGRADE, grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation.732 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752Table 3.Summary of recommended interventions for the perioperative care of lumbar fusionNb Item Recommendation Evidence level RecommendationgradePreoperative recommendations1 Preoperative education &counsellingPreoperative patient education is recommended. Low Strong2 Prehabilitation Evidence is currently insufficient to make a recommendation on prehabilitation as an essential intervention for all patients.3 Preoperative nutritionalsupplementationPatients undergoing lumbar fusion should undergo a preoperative nutritional assessment. Low StrongPreoperative nutritional interventions should be offered to patients identified as malnourished Low Strong4 Preoperative cessation of smoking A combined smoking cessation therapy at a minimum of 4 weeks before surgery is recommended. Moderate Strong5 Preoperative cessation of alcohol Alcohol cessation programs 4?8 weeks before surgery can reduce postoperative complications. Moderate Strong6 Preoperative fasting and carbohydrate treatment Clear fluid should be permitted up to 2 hours and solid foods up to 6 hours before the induction of general anesthesia. High StrongEvidence is currently insufficient to make a recommendation on routine use of oral carbohydrate load for lumbar spine fusion.7 Preanesthetic medication The routine administration of sedatives to reduce anxiety preoperatively is not recommended Low StrongThe routine preoperative administration of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part of amultimodal opioid sparing analgesia strategy is recommended.Moderate Strong8 Anemia management Preoperative anemia should be assessed and corrected prior to lumbar fusion. Low StrongIntraoperative recommendations9 Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skinpreparationA care bundle should be implemented, including administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic coveringS. aureus, and skin preparation using either alcohol-based iodine or chlorohexidine solution.Administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic covering S. aureus (with possibility of repeating dosesduring longer surgeries)High StrongAntiseptic dressing the night before surgery Low ModerateSkin preparation using use of either alcohol-based iodine or chlorohexidine solution High Strong10 Standard anesthetic protocol Modern general anesthesia, including the use of neuromuscular blockade and neuraxial techniquesshould be used as part of multimodal anesthetic strategies follow local policy and availability.Moderate Strong11 Preventing intraoperativehypothermiaNormothermia should be maintained peri- and postoperatively through pre-warming and the activewarming of patients intraoperativelyHigh Strong12 Surgical techniques Surgical technique should be decided on a case-by-case basis factoring the goals of surgery, training andexperience of the surgeon, and the availability of technology at the local institution.Low Strong13 Local anesthetic techniques Use of intrathecal morphine, epidural analgesia, locoregional blocks or wound infiltration with long-acting local anesthetics should be used to improve postoperative pain management.Intrathecal analgesia High StrongEpidural analgesia High StrongLocoregional blocks High WeakWound infiltration High Strong14 Perioperative fluid management Intravenous fluids should maintain near-euvolemic status. Moderate StrongGoal directed fluid management is not needed for 1-2 level lumbar fusion but should be considered ifsignificant patient co-morbidities exist.Low Strong15 Early postoperative oral nutrition An early return to normal diet is recommended and should be promoted. Low Strong16 Urinary drainage The routine use of urinary catheters is not recommended for short-segment elective lumbar spinal fusionswith or without concomitant decompression. When used, they should be removed within hours of surgery with close monitoringModerate WeakB. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 733function following surgery [46]. Across surgical disciplines,prehabilitation is an intervention that combines exercise,nutrition therapy, and psychological preparation. These programs have been shown to facilitate recovery in the generalsurgery discipline [47]. In contrast, prehabilitation has notbeen found to reduce LOS in orthopedic procedures such aship and knee replacement, and for these operations, it is notroutinely recommended [27].Within the spine surgery literature, a recent systematicreview of three RCTs concluded that there is insufficientevidence to ascertain whether prehabilitation improvedfunctional outcomes [48]. Further procedure-specificresearch is required and should target prehabilitationinterventions for specific groups of patients known torecover slowly following surgery. These include theelderly and frail patients, patients with special needs ormultiple comorbidities, and patients with psychiatric illnesses.SummaryEvidence is currently insufficient to make a recommendation on prehabilitation as an essential intervention forall patients.Preoperative nutritional supplementationThe diagnosis of preoperative malnutrition can beachieved by using a combination of laboratory testing,anthropometric measurements, and standardized nutritional scoring systems such as the Mini NutritionalAssessment tool [49]. Low albumin, low transferrin levels, and low lymphocyte count have been associated withincreased risk of surgical site infections, postoperativecomplications, increased length of hospital stay, 30-dayreadmission rates, and mortality following spinal surgery[50?55].Although malnutrition has been well established as a riskfactor for poor outcomes in many surgeries, there is a paucity of studies that evaluate whether modifying or optimizing preoperative nutritional states results in improvedclinical outcomes following spinal surgery. In an RCT evaluating a multimodal nutritional management protocol,including protein, nutritional, and carbohydrate powderpacks given to patients before and after lumbar spinal surgery, was associated with shorter LOS, lower incidence ofelectrolyte disturbances, and higher postoperative albuminlevels on postoperative day 3 compared to control patients[56].When evidence of malnutrition is detected, first-linetherapy should consist of dietary advice, meal fortificationwith protein, and increasing the variety and taste of diet[57]. Oral nutritional supplements can also be used toimprove energy and nutrient intake and have been associated with reduced LOS in hospitalized patients compared toTable 3.routine clinical care [57].(Continued)Nb Item Recommendation Evidence level RecommendationgradePostoperative recommendations17 Postoperative analgesia The routine use of multimodal analgesic regimens to improve pain control and reduce opioid consumption is recommended. Moderate Strong18 Postoperative nausea and vomiting Risk assessment for PONV, routinely use of multimodal PONV prophylaxis based on assessment, andPONV rescue with different class of anti-emetic are recommendedHigh Strong19 Postoperative management of drains Routine wound drainage is not recommended for short-segment lumbar fusion surgery Moderate Strong20 Prophylaxis againstthromboembolismEarly ambulation and the use of mechano-prophylaxis should be encouraged in all patients after spinalsurgery.Moderate StrongPharmaceutical antithrombotic prophylaxis should be reserved for specific risk groups, while no recommendation can be made with regard to its standardized use. Low Strong21 Early mobilization and in-hospitalphysical therapyEarly mobilization and early physical therapy are recommended Low Strong22 Continuous improvement and audit Routinely auditing and feedback is necessary for implementation of ERAS protocols, maintaining highcompliance to ERAS protocols and realizing quality improvementsLow Strong734 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752Summary/recommendationsPatients undergoing lumbar fusion should undergo a preoperative nutritional assessment.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongPreoperative nutritional interventions should be offeredto patients identified as malnourished.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongPreoperative cessation of smokingTobacco smoking is a risk factor for perioperative andpostoperative complications such as pulmonary and cardiovascular complications, pseudoarthrosis, worse functionaloutcomes, deep vein thrombosis, delirium, morbidity, andmortality [58?65].Preoperative smoking cessation interventions are effectivein reducing postoperative complications. A meta-analysisincluding six RCTs concerning various elective surgeriesdemonstrated that each week of cessation increases the magnitude of effect by 19% [66]. A minimum period of 4 weeksof cessation is effective in reducing postoperative respiratoryand wound healing complications [66?68]. Nicotine replacement therapy combined with intensive counseling was themost effective method for smoking cessation with short- tolong-term benefit [69?71].After spine surgery, it is also important to maintain smoking cessation. Continued smoking after spine surgery wasassociated with an increased recurrence of lumbar disk herniation [72,73], increased postoperative opioid utilization [74],and pseudarthrosis [75?77]. Smokers should be counseledabout the increased risk of pseudarthrosis before surgery[77,78].Summary/recommendationA combined smoking cessation therapy at a minimum of4 weeks before surgery is recommended.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongPreoperative cessation of alcoholA systematic review of 25 case-control studies showeddaily consumption of >2 units of alcohol increased the riskof postoperative complications after spinal surgery [60].The impact of ?2 units of alcohol on postoperative complications is less obvious. Complications associated with alcohol consumption in spinal surgery include pseudarthroses,postoperative infections, cardiopulmonary complications,postoperative ileus, delirium, bleeding episodes, and deepvenous thrombosis [60,63,64,79?83].Several meta-analyses of RCTs, including two Cochranereviews in the orthopedic and neurosurgical population,showed that preoperative alcohol cessation interventions 48weeks before surgery could reduce the risk of postoperativecomplications, but not mortality [79,82,84]. Alcohol cessationprograms include a combination of behavioral interventions,disulfiram, vitamins, and benzodiazepines [84]. These strategies have been shown to significantly improve abstinenceduring the intervention period; however, these studies werelimited by their small sample size [82].Summary/recommendationAlcohol cessation programs 4 to 8 weeks before surgerycan reduce postoperative complications.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongPreoperative fasting and carbohydrate treatmentFasting from midnight before induction of general anesthesia aims to reduce the volume and acidity of the stomach contents during surgery, thus reducing the risk of pulmonaryaspiration [85]. However, this dogma has not been supportedempirically [86?88]. A Cochrane review of 22 RCTs in elective gynecological and general surgery showed only six studies that evaluated the incidence of aspiration, and from these,no aspiration events were observed [89]. There was no difference in the volume or pH of the gastric content betweenpatients in the fasting group compared to patients who wereallowed clear fluids until 2 hours before anesthetic induction[89]. The European Society of Anaesthesiology and AmericanSociety of Anesthesiology guideline recommends clear liquids(eg, water and black coffee) may be ingested for up to 2 hoursand a light solid meal may be ingested up to 6 hours beforesurgery requiring general anesthesia [87,88].Surgical trauma results in multiple neuroendocrineresponses resulting in a catabolic state characterized byincreased protein breakdown and insulin resistance, leadingto postoperative hyperglycemia and other physiological disturbances that may affect recovery [90]. Preoperativeadministration of oral carbohydrate load (CHO) has beenshown to attenuate both insulin resistance and an overallcatabolic state in other surgical disciplines [91]. Two RCTshave compared the effects of CHO versus preoperative fasting on glucose control in the spinal surgery population[92,93]; neither could prove the advantage of CHO loading.As such, the clinical benefit of CHO loading in spinal surgery remains controversial, and a specific recommendationfor its routine use cannot be made.Summary/recommendationsClear fluid should be permitted up to 2 hours and solidfoods up to 6 hours before the induction of generalanesthesia.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 735Quality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongEvidence is currently insufficient to make a recommendation on routine use of CHO load for lumbar spinefusion.Pre-anesthetic medicationPreoperative anxiety is a common phenomenon and maylead to increased perioperative analgesic requirements [94].Pharmacological anxiolytic strategies include the prescription of sedative or anxiolytic drugs like benzodiazepines.However, even a single dose of benzodiazepines can causeneurocognitive impairment and have sedative effects [95].A large retrospective cohort study of 94,887 procedures ofgeneral and orthopedic surgery demonstrated that benzodiazepine use was associated with an increased risk of anadverse event postoperatively (odds ratio [OR] 1.13; 95%confidence interval [CI] 1.081.18) [96]. Therefore, sedative or anxiolytic drugs should be avoided to prevent therisk of neurocognitive impairment and postoperativeadverse events.Preemptive analgesia can also be applied as part of amultimodal opioid-sparing analgesia strategy. The commonly used drugs include acetaminophen (paracetamol),nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and gabapentinoids. Preoperative administration of acetaminophenand NSAIDs has been shown to decrease postoperativepain scores, is opioid-sparing, and can be administered easily in a cost-effective manner [35,97]. In spinal surgery,NSAIDs induced inhibition of fusion is still under debateand discussed in another section.Two meta-analyses of RCTs in spine surgery showedthat preoperative use of gabapentinoids resulted in areduction in total morphine consumption in the first 24 to48 hours, lower pain scores, and a significantly lowerincidence of morphine related side effects such as postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), pruritus, and urinary retention compared to placebo. There was nosignificant difference in the occurrence of gabapentinoidrelated sedation or dizziness [98,99]. Dosing of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids should ideally beadjusted based on age, renal function, and other comorbidities.Summary/recommendationsThe routine administration of sedatives to reduce anxietypreoperatively is not recommendedQuality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongThe routine preoperative administration of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part of a multimodal opioid-sparing analgesia strategy is recommended.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongAnemia managementPreoperative anemia affects approximately one-third ofpatients undergoing elective surgery and is associated withan increased risk of transfusion, LOS, infection, morbidity,and readmission rate [100,101]. Evaluation of the NationalSurgical Quality Improvement Program database foundthat all levels of preoperative anemia were significantlyassociated with prolonged hospital LOS and poorer outcomes at 30-days in patients undergoing elective spine surgery [102]. Similarly, other studies have foundpreoperative anemia as an independent risk factor for perioperative complications [103?105]. Together, these studies suggest preoperative investigation for anemia isimportant, especially for patients undergoing major orcomplex spine surgery.Interventions such as preoperative iron or erythropoietintherapy and postoperative retransfusion of salvaged cells, ingeneral, report a statistically significant and clinically relevant reduction in allogeneic blood transfusion [106?109].Algorithm-led preoperative anemia screening in establishedERAS centers performing spinal procedures has been associated with reduced blood transfusions, readmission, criticalcare admission, LOS, and cost [27].In spine surgery, there is evidence to suggest that anemic patients undergoing complex spine surgery be administered oral iron supplementation, iron infusion, orerythropoietin to reach a target hemoglobin of 13 g/dL(130 g/L) [110]. However, this threshold is not widelyaccepted and has not been correlated to improved outcomes. If necessary, patients should be referred to hematology for further assessment and treatment. Future studiesare required to determine the association of preoperativeanemia optimization and perioperative outcomes in spinesurgery [111,112].Minimally invasive techniques could be recommended,as it has been shown that the blood loss is minimal withthose procedures [28,112].Summary/recommendationsPreoperative anemia should be assessed and correctedbefore lumbar fusion.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongIntraoperative recommendationsAntimicrobial prophylaxis and skin preparationThere is no universally accepted guideline for antibiotic/antiseptic prophylaxis for spinal fusion. One review in736 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752spinal surgery showed that preoperative screening and eradication of methicillin-sensitive or methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus may reduce surgical site infections(SSI) in noncarriers compared to carriers [113]. Preoperative intranasal mupirocin ointment has also been shown toreduce SSI in orthopedic surgery significantly but has notbeen substantiated in spine surgery [114].RCTs demonstrated that prophylactic antibiotics may beconsidered to decrease the rate of infection followinginstrumented spine fusion [115?117]. A more recent metaanalysis of RCTs cross-checks these data by showing a significant reduction in SSI after prophylactic antibioticadministration [118].In synergy with this body of evidence, scientific societieshave proposed guidelines for using perioperative prophylactic antibiotics in spine surgery [119,120]. Although thesuperiority of one antibiotic agent or dosing regimen overanother has not been clearly demonstrated [118,121],administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic covering S.aureus, such as cefazolin, 30 minutes before skin incisionwith redosing every 4 hours during longer surgeries, hasbecome common practice in spine surgery [122]. Each context needs to be evaluated, related to the patient¡¦s possiblecomorbidities and the complexity of the procedure [113].The ideal skin intraoperative preparation to reduce therisk of SSI remains unclear in spine surgery. There was noclear benefit of chlorhexidine shower at home before surgical preparation [123], consistent with a Cochrane review onthe same topic, which found no significant evidence to justify the use of preoperative cleansing as a strategy to prevent surgical site infections [124]. Antiseptic dressing thenight before surgery was associated with a reduction in SSIafter orthopedic surgery, but that has not been studied inspine surgery [125,126].A meta-analysis of RCTs with various surgical procedures, including spine surgery, showed that alcohol-basedagents are superior to aqueous solutions [127]. The use ofeither iodine preparation or chlorohexidine preparation provides adequate intraoperative skin preparation [128]. Chlorohexidine preparation could provide a more favorablelonger-lasting effect for skin antisepsis in posterior spinesurgery [127,129], but other RCTs demonstrated conflictingresults, with conclusions favoring each preparation solution[130,131].The timing of preoperative skin preparation is essential.One RCT using povidone-iodine demonstrated that bacteria on the skin are significantly reduced by allowing thepreparation to dry for several minutes before spine surgery[132].Summary/recommendationA care bundle should be implemented, including administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic covering S.aureus, and skin preparation using either alcohol-basediodine or chlorohexidine solution.Administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic coveringStaphylococcus aureus (with possibility of repeatingdoses during longer surgeries)Quality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongAntiseptic dressing the night before surgeryQuality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: ModerateSkin preparation using use of either alcohol-based iodineor chlorohexidine solutionQuality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongStandard anesthetic protocolThe anesthetic protocol used in lumbar fusion surgery isvaried with a few high-quality studies that have comparedthe efficacy of various methods. In a large observationalstudy of spine surgery using propensity score analysis,there was no difference between nongeneral and generalanesthesia for readmission rates, complications, and LOS[133]. An RCT including 80 spinal surgery patientsshowed significant improvement in hemodynamic stability,blood loss, and pain control with nongeneral anesthetictechniques [134]. Additionally, epidural anesthesia, combined with general anesthesia, also appears to limit bloodloss [135].There are many options for general anesthesia becauseof the wide range of available drugs and modes of delivery.Two RCTs reported that the use of neuromuscular blockadereduced airway pressure and muscle damage associatedwith prolonged retraction in spine surgery [136,137].Inhaled anesthetics (eg, sevoflurane) have been shown toimprove the time to orientation in the postanesthetic careunit and lower pain scores in the first 24 hours after surgery[138]. Furthermore, dexmedetomidine and ketamine havebeen shown to provide improved pain control, and dexmedetomidine alone is associated with a lower incidence ofPONV in RCTs [139?141].Summary/recommendationModern general anesthesia, including the use of neuromuscular blockade and neuraxial techniques should beused as part of multimodal anesthetic strategies followlocal policy and availability.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongPreventing intraoperative hypothermiaIntraoperative hypothermia should be avoided as it hasbeen associated with increased blood loss, cardiacB. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 737complications, shivering, SSIs, and prolonged LOS [142?147]. Based on a large body of strong evidence, the UK¡¦sNational Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends prewarming of patients and active warming for alladults undergoing surgery throughout the intraoperativeperiod [148].Strategies to prevent hypothermia include the use ofwarmed infusion liquids, prewarming, and forced air-warming blankets and devices [149?156]. Ten minutes of prewarming could reduce hypothermia, and its adverse effectssignificantly [157]. Circulating warming garments offer better temperature control than forced-air warming systems,but both are more effective than passive warming devices[158?160].Summary/recommendationNormothermia should be maintained peri- and postoperatively through prewarming and active warming ofpatients intraoperatively.Quality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongSurgical techniquesThere is a significant number of articles in the literaturelinking the notion of a particular spinal surgery techniqueto a reduction of the LOS, by optimizing the approach,reducing bleeding, controlling pain, etc. [12,161]. However, no single technique (approach, minimally or lessinvasive technique, endoscopy, specific implants, navigation, robotics, biologics, etc.) could be independentlyshown to accelerate the achievement of discharge criteria.No RCTs could be found in the literature combiningERAS and surgical techniques. Several recent retrospectivestudies involved the use of minimally invasive techniques[28?30] and had rationales close to that of the ERAS. Inall studies, the surgical technique was not limited or dictated by the ERAS protocol. Due to the lack of unequivocaldata, the selection of surgical technique for future ERASprotocols should factor in surgery goals, surgeon¡¦s experience, and the availability of equipment at the local institution [29,161?163].Summary/recommendationSurgical techniques should be decided on a case-by-casebasis, factoring surgery goals, training, and experienceof the surgeon, and the availability of technology at thelocal institution.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongLocal, regional anesthetic techniquesThe use of local, regional techniques for pain management is an attractive option for spinal surgery to improvepostoperative pain control and the undesirable side effectsof opioids that can delay recovery. A multimodal approachusing local and regional anesthesia techniques, such as spinal or epidural analgesia, regional blocks, or wound infiltration, could reduce opioid consumption, side effects of thesedrugs, and improve analgesic efficacy.Four RCTs evaluating intrathecal morphine injectioncompared to placebo have been shown to reduce pain scoresand reduce postoperative systemic opioid use without significant adverse events [164?167]. However, the incidenceof pruritus appears to be higher [167,168]. The addition ofnaloxone may facilitate the efficacy of intrathecal morphineinjection and reduce complications (eg, pruritus and nausea) [169]. Even for minimally invasive surgery, intrathecalmorphine injection reduces postoperative pain and patientcontrolled analgesia (PCA) morphine consumption [170].Fentanyl is also efficacious for spinal analgesia [171].Additionally, epidural analgesia (EA) is effective inreducing postoperative pain after lumbar fusion without significant side effects [172,173]. The use of a long-actinglocal anesthetic (ropivacaine, levobupivacaine, bupivacaine) or a combination of local anesthetic and opioidappears to be a better option than morphine alone to reducepostoperative pain as demonstrated in a series of RCTs inlumbar fusions patients [172?178]. Three other RCTs onmajor spinal surgery showed improved efficacy and patientsatisfaction of EA compared with PCA [174?176]. Thebest regimen (single shot, continuous infusion, patient-controlled EA) of EA is unresolved. Optimal results appear ifEA is started early in the procedure [179,180]. With a smalldose of local anesthetic, the transient motor deficit is notdescribed [172].Regarding regional plane blocks, different techniqueshave been described in spinal surgery (erector spinae planeblock, quadratus lumborum, thoraco-lumbar interfacialplane [TLIP] block). Only the TLIP block has been evaluated for lumbar fusion: in a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial, the TLIP block significantly reducedanalgesic drug consumption at 24 and 48 hours, pain, andLOS without complications [181].A prospective cohort study showed wound infiltration(WI) to effectively reduce postoperative pain after lumbarfusion [182], but well-designed RCTs are lacking. One randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled trial, including120 patients with posterior lumbar spine surgery, evaluatedwound infiltration with bupivacaine combined with localmethylprednisolone versus placebo and demonstrated significantly improved postoperative analgesic management(reduction in opioid utilization, lower pain scores, andhigher patient satisfaction) [183]. Continuous infiltrationusing a wound catheter provides good pain relief for up to738 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?75248 hours [182,184] and adding dexmedetomidine or clonidine (a2-agonists) to topical local anesthetics (bupivacaineor ropivacaine) increases the effectiveness of wound infiltration [185,186].Summary/recommendationUse of intrathecal morphine, epidural analgesia, locoregional blocks, or wound infiltration with long-actinglocal anesthetics should be used to improve postoperative pain management.Intrathecal analgesiaQuality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongEpidural analgesiaQuality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongLocoregional blocksQuality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: WeakWound infiltrationQuality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongPerioperative fluid managementCareful perioperative fluid management is key as hyperor hypovolemia is associated with inadequate cellular oxygen delivery, particularly in patients with poor cardiovascular and renal reserve. Patients on ERAS pathways aregenerally in a state of euvolemia, due to several factors,such as reduced preoperative fasting time and carbohydrateloading. Goal-directed fluid management is often a recommended element in ERAS protocols [187]; however, thereis limited evidence in its effectiveness in spine surgery [188?190]. One study showed that goal-directed fluid management resulted in the early return of bowel function aftermajor spinal surgery [191]. Applied to scoliosis surgery, asimilar protocol was associated with less crystalloid fluidadministration, fewer perioperative transfusions, and significantly improved diuresis [192]. Other studies have shownexcessive intravenous fluids to be associated with ileus[193,194]. One RCT in spine surgery evaluated the choiceof fluid and concluded that normal saline made patients acidotic due to its high chlorine content [195]. A recent metaanalysis did not find the use of colloids nor different volumes of crystalloids administered to be associated withLOS after short construct lumbar fusion [196]. These findings are corroborated by other retrospective studies[197,198]. In common with ERAS protocols for other surgical disciplines, administering balanced intravenous solutions maintaining euvolemia is recommended.Summary/recommendationIntravenous fluids should be maintained near-euvolemicstatus.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongGoal-directed fluid management is not needed for 12level lumbar fusion but should be considered if significant patient comorbidities exist.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongEarly postoperative oral nutritionNo studies have investigated the direct association ofearly feeding or postoperative nutritional supplementationwith ERAS in spine surgery [36]. However, return to normal food intake is considered an essential component ofERAS protocols to return to normal activities [1,36].Most ¡§fast-track¡¨ programs in orthopedic surgery promoteearly oral nutrition after surgery, but the mention ofspecific nutritional diets is highly variable or not detailed[199?201]. Early return to a normal diet is a principal component of orthopedics ERAS protocols, and patients shouldbe encouraged to eat and drink as soon as they feel able. Nostudy reported nutritional counseling or ad hoc diet to becontinued after the discharge.Summary/recommendationAn early return to a normal diet is recommended andshould be promoted.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongUrinary drainageUrinary catheterization is commonly placed intraoperatively, to monitor urine output, prevent bladder distention,and serve as a surrogate marker for hemodynamic stability[202]. However, prolonged urinary drainage is associatedwith complications such as urinary tract infections, surgicalsite infections, and postoperative urinary retention (POUR)following spine surgery [203,204]. Patients who developPOUR after spine surgery are at increased risk of sepsis andhave increased LOS and cost to the healthcare system[205,206]. Limited urinary catheterization in patientsundergoing spine surgery can potentially avoid or minimizeadverse events and facilitate patient ambulation [111]. Forexample, one study reported the initial ERAS experiencewith minimally invasive lumbar interbody fusion procedures under local anesthesia where they managed withoutthe use of urinary catheters [207].B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 739The use of urinary catheters should be avoided in patientsscheduled for short elective spinal operations and, if used,they should be removed within hours after surgery. Carefulevaluation of postvoid volumes is necessary after spinaloperations to ensure patients do not develop POUR [205].Summary/recommendationThe routine use of urinary catheters is not recommendedfor short-segment elective lumbar spinal fusions with orwithout concomitant decompression. When used, theyshould be removed within hours of surgery with closemonitoring.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: WeakPostoperative recommendationsPostoperative analgesiaPoor postoperative pain control is observed in 57% ofpatients following elective spine surgery [208]. Inadequateacute pain control is associated with the development ofchronic pain and significant systemic inflammatoryresponse leading to organ dysfunction and pain [209,210].A standardized perioperative multimodal antinociceptiveprotocol results in adequate postoperative pain relief andimproved outcomes [5]. Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is abasic part of perioperative multimodal pain managementand is used widely, either orally or intravenously [35,211].Acetaminophen is an analgesic and antipyretic but is notanti-inflammatory, and its analgesic activity is additive toother analgesic drugs like NSAIDs and opioids[35,211,212]. Despite its hepatic toxicity, acetaminophen islikely one of the safest and most cost-effective nonopioidanalgesic drugs [211].RCTs and meta-analysis of RCTs focusing on spineshowed that NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors,are highly effective in reducing pain and key in opioid-sparingstrategies in multimodal analgesia [212?216]. COX-2 drugsthat do not affect platelet aggregation can be prescribed if surgeons are concerned about bleeding [35,212?216].There is still debate about whether NSAIDs are associated with an increased incidence of impaired osteogenesisand pseudarthrosis after spinal fusion. However, there is noconclusive evidence for the negative impact of NSAIDs onbone healing, and there is evidence that short-term (<2weeks) perioperative NSAID use does not influence fusionrates [217,218]. Therefore, acetaminophen and NSAIDs,including COX-2 inhibitors, should be part of a multimodalstrategy after spinal surgery unless there are patient specificcontraindications for its use¡¨ [218].Opioids are effective in treating acute postoperative painfollowing spinal surgery [210]. However, opioid-sparingtechniques are important and should be applied in ERASpathways to allow patients to recover early and reduce complications related to opioid use [210].Several RCTs in other surgical specialties investigatedmultimodal opioid-sparing techniques for postoperativeanalgesia, including acetaminophen, NSAID¡¦s, gabapentin,a2-agonists, S-ketamine, magnesium sulfate, high-dose steroids, and local anesthetic infusion (epidural or intravenous) or PCA with morphine, which showed a decrease inpain reduction [35,210,211,219?221]. However, welldesigned studies with the highest level of evidence in spinalsurgery are inconclusive or lacking.Summary/recommendationThe routine use of multimodal analgesic regimens toimprove pain control and reduce opioid consumption isrecommended.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongPostoperative nausea and vomitingPONV is essential for patients undergoing any type ofsurgery. PONV results in mild to severe dehydration,delayed return of adequate nutrition intake, increased intravenous fluid administration postoperatively, prolongedLOS, and increased healthcare costs [222,223]. Furthermore, PONV affects 30% to 50% of all surgical patients,and up to 80% of patients are at high risk for developingPONV [222,223]. Therefore, preoperative risk assessmentis essential in ERAS pathways and should also be appliedin spine surgery [224]. Major risk factors are female gender,patients with a history of PONV or motion sickness, andnonsmokers [225,226].The use of volatile anesthetic gases, nitrous oxide, andopioids increases the risk of PONV significantly [227]. Several scoring systems have been developed for the predictionof PONV, and the most used are the Koivuranta score andApfel¡¦s simplification of this score. These scores are usefulwhen combined with specific therapeutic interventions,especially in high-risk patients [223].There are several classes of first-line antiemetic drugs,including dopamine (D2) antagonists (eg, droperidol), serotonin (5HT3) antagonists (eg, ondansetron), and corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone). If rescue PONV treatmentis required, a different class of antiemetics should beadministered than the one administered for prophylaxis[223,228,229]. Second-line drugs may also be used, such asantihistamines (eg, promethazine), anticholinergics (eg,scopolamine), and other D2 antagonists, such as metoclopramide, but their use may be limited by common sideeffects such as sedation, dry mouth, blurred vision, and dyskinesia [228].740 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752Summary/recommendationRisk assessment for PONV, routine use of multimodalPONV prophylaxis based on assessment and PONV rescue with a different class of anti-emetic, is recommended.Quality of evidence: HighRecommendation grade: StrongPostoperative management of drainsForty-seven studies concerning postoperative drainagewere relevant to ERAS protocols for lumbar fusion. A summary of the findings was that subfascial drain usage infusion surgery to treat lumbar degenerative disease is common, but the literature on its utility is of low quality (caseseries, uncontrolled cohort studies, review of level 3 evidence). The common practice of using drains stems from itsrelatively low cost and morbidity [230]. The primary utilityidentified was for the reduction in SSI and postoperativeepidural hematoma (PEH) formation, complications carrying significant clinical consequences [231].Four RCTs indicate that drain placement was not shownto result in lower incidence of either SSI or PEH [232?235].While not all the relevant studies were focused on lumbarfusion, numerous large cohort studies [236?239] and literature reviews [240,241] have demonstrated similar findings.Of note, a Cochrane Review of orthopedic procedures in general (including spine) drew similar conclusions [242]. Inaddition, prolonged drainage was associated with higher SSIrates, although it was unclear whether this was predictive orcausative [243,244]. Nonfusion studies have suggested thatthe evacuation of hematoma at the surgical site via drainagemay reduce the rate of delayed epidural fibrosis from bloodcollections [234]. However, for short-segment and less invasive fusion surgeries, the use of a drain delayed ambulationand was associated with more pain at the surgical site, andthus has implications for ERAS protocols [244].Summary/recommendationRoutine wound drainage is not recommended for shortsegment lumbar fusion surgery.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongProphylaxis against thromboembolismThe estimated incidence of symptomatic deep veinthrombosis and pulmonary embolism following electivespinal surgery is low at 0.9% (range: 0%3.5%) and 0.7%(range: 0%7.6%), respectively [245]. The low incidenceof venous thromboembolism (VTE), including patientswith no prophylaxis, and the lack of evidence regarding theoptimal choice for thromboprophylaxis after spinal surgeryhave led to wide variations in practice [246,247]. The fewRCTs in the literature on this topic have a relatively smallsample size [248?250]. Other studies are not randomized[251,252], which is particularly detrimental when attempting to detect infrequent outcomes such as VTE followingelective spinal surgery.However, early ambulation should be encouraged in allpatients [246,247]. Given the relatively low cost, low complication rates, and documented efficacy, mechanoprophylaxis, such as compression stockings and intermittentpneumatic compression devices, should be considered in allpatients following spinal surgery [251,253]. The use of chemoprophylaxis is more controversial. Some retrospectivestudies show that chemoprophylaxis is effective in reducingVTE [254?257], while other studies show no benefit[245,258,259]. One meta-analysis, based on 28 studies,showed that elective spinal surgery is associated with a lowrisk of VTE [245]. In this context, chemoprophylaxis maynot be warranted, given the definable risk of postoperativeepidural hematoma formation and other complications[254,259]. Chemoprophylaxis may be more appropriatelyused in high-risk patients, such as those with advanced age,neurological deficits, history of VTEs, and those undergoing surgery for spinal deformity, trauma, and metastaticbone disease [260?266]. There is insufficient evidence torecommend the timing of initiation and the duration ofthromboprophylaxis [267].Summary/recommendationEarly ambulation and the use of mechanoprophylaxisshould be encouraged in all patients after spinal surgery.Quality of evidence: ModerateRecommendation grade: StrongPharmaceutical antithrombotic prophylaxis should bereserved for specific risk groups, while no recommendation can be made concerning standardized use.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongEarly mobilization and in-hospital physical therapyPatients should be encouraged to mobilize as soon asthey are able, to counteract the adverse physiologicaleffects associated with prolonged bed rest (such as insulinresistance, muscle atrophy, reduced pulmonary function,impaired tissue oxygenation, and increased risk of thromboembolism) [268]. There is an absence of level 1 publications specifically examining the role of early mobilizationin spine surgery. However, in numerous cohort studies,early mobilization following spinal surgery and other majorprocedures has been linked to reduced morbidity and LOS[269]. Goal-directed early mobilization has been recommended following spinal surgery [270], with LOS reducedfor lumbar fusion patients ambulating at least 30 feet/10meters on the day of surgery [271].B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 741Furthermore, early commencement of physical therapyin spine surgery patients has been shown to facilitate earlyreturn to functional activity in RCT [272]. Patients withchronic back pain who undergo lumbar spinal fusion surgery often have high levels of kinesiophobia and can haveprolonged inactivity postoperatively [273]. Early involvement of physical therapists in high-risk patients mayincrease postoperative mobilization and prevent the negative effects of prolonged bed rest. Before discharge, independent transfer and stair climbing should be achieved[274].Summary/recommendationEarly mobilization and early physical therapy arerecommended.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongContinuous improvement and auditThe previous implementation of ERAS protocols inother surgical disciplines has led to a reduction in complications, shorter LOS, and improved cost savings, demonstrating a good example of value-based healthcare [275,276].The analysis of the literature on ERAS audit is based almostexclusively on systematic reviews, and prospective studieson this topic are still to be developed. However, one prospective analysis comparing self-declared ERAS with nonERAS hospitals demonstrated that having an ERAS protocol is not enough to improve patient outcomes [277]. Dailypractice is influenced by opinions and memories. Evidencebased medicine improves personal performance and raisesthe overall standard of health care delivery [278]. Theimplementation of enhanced recovery pathways is successful in hospitals with data feedback of process and outcomemeasures [279]. Staff are positive about the implementationof ERAS but find the process difficult [280]. Monitoring,feedback of processes, and outcome measures are essentialto secure a successful implementation of ERAS guidelines[279]. It is also helpful for health professionals to maintainhigh compliance with ERAS recommendations and qualityimprovement [5,29,275,281]. Multidisciplinary teams arerecommended to implement ERAS protocols [280,282].Patients appear to be more satisfied and motivated in ERASprograms [283?285].Summary/recommendationRoutine auditing and feedback are necessary for implementing ERAS protocols, maintaining high compliancewith ERAS protocols, and realizing quality improvements.Quality of evidence: LowRecommendation grade: StrongSummary and ConclusionThis consensus statement represents the most recent evidence-based recommendations from the ERAS SocietyGuideline group for the perioperative management ofpatients undergoing lumbar fusion for degenerative spinalconditions (Fig. 1). A detailed summary of the recommendations is provided in Table 3.These guidelines are important in summarizing the largevolume of heterogeneous studies across all ERAS items forlumbar fusion, a surgical area where the application ofERAS is still in its infancy. The authors¡¦ recommendationsprovided in this guideline are following the methods set outby the ERAS Society and based on the synthesis of objective assessment of the best available evidence in lumbarfusion surgery, other surgical disciplines, and expert opinion of the GDG. As such, strong recommendations may bereached from low-quality or conflicting data and vice versa.Likewise, this methodology explains that certain levels ofevidence have been downgraded if extrapolated from othersurgical areas.The main purpose was to define current standards toenable new multidisciplinary teams to implement theseprocedures in their practice to improve outcomes. Thisconsensus statement also highlights the numerousresearch opportunities that exist and encourages furtherresearch in areas where procedure-specific research isrequired. Indeed, while the few clinical studies availableseem promising, studies of high methodological qualityare needed.The lines of research to be developed could include prehabilitation measures, pain control in this highly painfulsurgery, improvement of psychological evaluation in thisfunctional area, improvement of the evaluation of surgicaltechniques, standardized postoperative rehabilitation recommendations, the possible introduction of outpatient management, and integration of patient related outcomes in thepermanent evaluation of results.This work also confirms that the successful implementation of ERAS protocols for spine surgery is an inherentlymultidisciplinary concept, and in fact, surgical techniquesdo not matter in the overall management, as has alreadybeen seen in other disciplines.Techniques such as minimally invasive techniques haveelements very close to the ERAS concepts (eg, decreasesurgical stress). However, there is no evidence to recommend them over traditional open procedures.It is essential to promote the evaluation of the implemented procedures, permanent audits of the teams, analysisof the results, including patient related outcomes, and compliance with the proposed ERAS protocols, including regular updates.Spine surgery includes multiple areas of development,and we emphasize that our recommendations are addressedto lumbar fusion, frequently defined by short constructs andrelatively fast operating times. Many opportunities will742 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752open up in the future for ERAS recommendations for otherspinal procedures, cervical spine surgery, anterior or combined approaches, complex deformities and scoliosis, etc.As in other areas of surgery, a successful introduction ofERAS protocols for lumbar fusion is possible, but a broadbased, multidisciplinary approach and system support isimperative for success.Supplementary materialsSupplementary material associated with this article canbe found in the online version at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2021.01.001.References[1] Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control postoperative pathophysiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth 1997;78:606¡V17. https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/78.5.606.[2] Fearon KCH, Ljungqvist O, Von Meyenfeldt M, Revhaug A,Dejong CHC, Lassen K, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery: aconsensus review of clinical care for patients undergoing colonicresection. Clin Nutr 2005;24:466¡V77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2005.02.002.[3] Kehlet H, Dahl JB. Anaesthesia, surgery, and challenges in postoperative recovery. Lancet 2003;362:1921¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14966-5.[4] Liu VX, Rosas E, Hwang J, Cain E, Foss-Durant A, Clopp M, et al.Enhanced recovery after surgery program implementation in 2 surgicalpopulations in an integrated health care delivery system. JAMA Surg2017;152:e171032. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2017.1032.[5] Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a review. JAMA Surg 2017;152:292¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2016.4952.[6] Deyo RA, Gray DT, Kreuter W, Mirza S, Martin BI. United Statestrends in lumbar fusion surgery for degenerative conditions. Spine2005;30:1441¡V5 discussion 1446-1447. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000166503.37969.8a.[7] Weinstein JN, Lurie JD, Olson PR, Bronner KK, Fisher ES. UnitedStates¡¦ trends and regional variations in lumbar spine surgery: 1992-2003. Spine 2006;31:2707¡V14. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000248132.15231.fe.[8] Rajaee SS, Bae HW, Kanim LEA, Delamarter RB. Spinal fusion inthe United States: analysis of trends from 1998 to 2008. Spine2012;37:67¡V76. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e31820cccfb.[9] Johnson WC, Seifi A. Trends of the neurosurgical economy in theUnited States. J Clin Neurosci 2018;53:20¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2018.04.041.[10] Sheikh SR, Thompson NR, Benzel E, Steinmetz M, Mroz T, TomicD, et al. Can we justify it? Trends in the utilization of spinal fusionsand associated reimbursement. Neurosurgery 2019:nyz400. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyz400.[11] Thomas K, Wong KH, Steelman SC, Rodriguez A. Surgical riskassessment and prevention in elderly spinal deformity patients.Geriatr Orthop Surg Rehabil 2019;10. https://doi.org/10.1177/2151459319851681.[12] Goldstein CL, Macwan K, Sundararajan K, Rampersaud YR. Perioperative outcomes and adverse events of minimally invasive versusopen posterior lumbar fusion: meta-analysis and systematic review.J Neurosurg Spine 2016;24:416¡V27. https://doi.org/10.3171/2015.2.SPINE14973.[13] Hellsten EK, Hanbidge MA, Manos AN, Lewis SJ, Massicotte EM,Fehlings MG, et al. An economic evaluation of perioperativeadverse events associated with spinal surgery. Spine J 2013;13:44¡V53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2013.01.003.[14] Street JT, Lenehan BJ, DiPaola CP, Boyd MD, Kwon BK, PaquetteSJ, et al. Morbidity and mortality of major adult spinal surgery. Aprospective cohort analysis of 942 consecutive patients. Spine J2012;12:22¡V34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2011.12.003.[15] Devin CJ, McGirt MJ. Best evidence in multimodal pain management in spine surgery and means of assessing postoperative painand functional outcomes. J Clin Neurosci 2015;22:930¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2015.01.003.[16] Archer K, Bird ML, Haug C, Coronado R, Wegener S, Devin CJ,et al. Patients¡¦ experience and expectations of lumbar spine surgery for degenerative conditions: a qualitative study. The SpineJournal 2015;15:S99¡V100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2015.07.046.[17] Gerbershagen HJ, Aduckathil S, van Wijck AJM, Peelen LM,Kalkman CJ, Meissner W. Pain intensity on the first day after surgery: a prospective cohort study comparing 179 surgical procedures. Anesthesiology 2013;118:934¡V44. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e31828866b3.[18] Schoenfeld AJ, Nwosu K, Jiang W, Yau AL, Chaudhary MA, ScullyRE, et al. Risk factors for prolonged opioid use following spine surgery, and the association with surgical intensity, among opioidnaive patients. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2017;99:1247¡V52. https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.16.01075.[19] Gomes T, Tadrous M, Mamdani MM, Paterson JM, Juurlink DN.The burden of opioid-related mortality in the United States. JAMANetw Open 2018;1:e180217. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.0217.[20] Debono B, Lonjon G, Galovich LA, Kerever S, Guiot B, Eicker S-O,et al. Indication variability in degenerative lumbar spine surgery: afour-nation survey. Spine 2018;43:185¡V92. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000002272.[21] Rushton A, White L, Heap A, Heneghan N. Evaluation of currentsurgeon practice for patients undergoing lumbar spinal fusion surgery in the United Kingdom. World J Orthop 2015;6:483¡V90.https://doi.org/10.5312/wjo.v6.i6.483.[22] Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Martin BI, Kreuter W, Goodman DC, JarvikJG. Trends, major medical complications, and charges associatedwith surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis in older adults. JAMA2010;303:1259¡V65. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.338.[23] F?orsth P, Olafsson G, Carlsson T, Frost A, Borgstr  ?om F, Fritzell P,et al. A randomized, controlled trial of fusion surgery for lumbarspinal stenosis. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1413¡V23. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1513721.[24] Groff MW. Introduction: guideline update for the performance offusion procedures for degenerative disease of the lumbar spine. JNeurosurg: Spine 2014;21 1?1. https://doi.org/10.3171/2014.4.SPINE14190.[25] Matz PG, Meagher RJ, Lamer T, Tontz WL, Annaswamy TM, Cassidy RC, et al. Guideline summary review: an evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of degenerative lumbarspondylolisthesis. The Spine Journal 2016;16:439¡V48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2015.11.055.[26] Resnick DK, Tosteson ANA, Groman RF, Ghogawala Z. Setting theequation: establishing value in spine care. Spine 2014;39:S43¡V50.https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000000581.[27] Wainwright TW, Immins T, Middleton RG. Enhanced recoveryafter surgery (ERAS) and its applicability for major spine surgery.Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2016;30:91¡V102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpa.2015.11.001.[28] Corniola MV, Debono B, Joswig H, Lemee J-M, Tessitore E.Enhanced recovery after spine surgery: review of the literature.Neurosurgical Focus 2019;46:E2. https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.1.FOCUS18657.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 743[29] Elsarrag M, Soldozy S, Patel P, Norat P, Sokolowski JD, Park MS,et al. Enhanced recovery after spine surgery: a systematic review.Neurosurg Focus 2019;46:E3. https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.1.FOCUS18700.[30] Dietz N, Sharma M, Adams S, Alhourani A, Ugiliweneza B, WangD, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) for spine surgery:a systematic review. World Neurosurg 2019;130:415¡V26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2019.06.181.[31] Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, AlonsoCoello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality ofevidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924¡V6.https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD.[32] Brindle M, Nelson G, Lobo D, Ljungqvist O, Gustafsson U. Recommendations from the ERAS society for standards for the development of enhanced recovery after surgery guidelines. BJS Open2019. https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs5.50238.[33] Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: thePRISMA statement. BMJ 2009;339:b2535. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2535.[34] Cerantola Y, Valerio M, Persson B, Jichlinski P, Ljungqvist O, Hubner M, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer: enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS()) society recommendations. Clin Nutr 2013;32:879¡V87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2013.09.014.[35] Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, Demartines N, Roulin D,Francis N, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colonicsurgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS()) Society recommendations. World J Surg 2013;37:259¡V84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-012-1772-0.[36] Wainwright TW, Gill M, McDonald DA, Middleton RG, Reed M,Sahota O, et al. Consensus statement for perioperative care in total hipreplacement and total knee replacement surgery: enhanced recoveryafter surgery (ERAS) society recommendations. Acta Orthop2019:1¡V17. https://doi.org/10.1080/17453674.2019.1683790.[37] Jones J, Hunter D. Consensus methods for medical and health services research. BMJ 1995;311:376¡V80. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.311.7001.376.[38] Carr DA, Saigal R, Zhang F, Bransford RJ, Bellabarba C, Dagal A.Enhanced perioperative care and decreased cost and length of stayafter elective major spinal surgery. Neurosurg Focus 2019;46:E5.https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.1.FOCUS18630.[39] Smith J, Probst S, Calandra C, Davis R, Sugimoto K, Nie L, et al.Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) program for lumbar spinefusion. Perioper Med (Lond) 2019;8:4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13741-019-0114-2.[40] Kong C-B, Jeon D-W, Chang B-S, Lee JH, Suk K-S, Park J-B. Outcome of spinal fusion for lumbar degenerative disease: a cross-sectional study in Korea. Spine 2010;35:1489¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181c49fd0.[41] Landers MR, Puentedura E, Louw A, McCauley A, Rasmussen Z,Bungum T. A population-based survey of lumbar surgery beliefs inthe United States. Orthop Nurs 2014;33:207¡V16. https://doi.org/10.1097/NOR.0000000000000064.[42] Low M, Burgess LC, Wainwright TW. A critical analysis of theexercise prescription and return to activity advice that is provided inpatient information leaflets following lumbar spine surgery. Medicina (Kaunas) 2019;55. https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina55070347.[43] Burgess LC, Arundel J, Wainwright TW. The effect of preoperativeeducation on psychological, clinical and economic outcomes inelective spinal surgery: a systematic review. Healthcare (Basel)2019;7. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare7010048.[44] Yang MMH, Riva-Cambrin J, Cunningham J, Jette N, Sajobi TT,Soroceanu A, et al. Development and validation of a clinical prediction score for poor postoperative pain control following electivespine surgery. J Neurosurg Spine 2020:1¡V10. https://doi.org/10.3171/2020.5.SPINE20347.[45] Carli F, Zavorsky GS. Optimizing functional exercise capacity in theelderly surgical population. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care2005;8:23¡V32. https://doi.org/10.1097/00075197-200501000-00005.[46] Santa Mina D, Clarke H, Ritvo P, Leung YW, Matthew AG, Katz J.Effect of total-body prehabilitation on postoperative outcomes: asystematic review and meta-analysis. Physiotherapy 2014;100:196¡V207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2013.08.008.[47] Carli F, Scheede-Bergdahl C. Prehabilitation to enhance perioperative care. Anesthesiol Clin 2015;33:17¡V33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anclin.2014.11.002.[48] Gometz A, Maislen D, Youtz C, Kary E, Gometz EL, Sobotka S,et al. The effectiveness of prehabilitation (Prehab) in both functionaland economic outcomes following spinal surgery: a systematicreview. Cureus 2018;10:e2675. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.2675.[49] Cross MB, Yi PH, Thomas CF, Garcia J, Della Valle CJ. Evaluationof malnutrition in orthopaedic surgery. J Am Acad Orthop Surg2014;22:193¡V9. https://doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-22-03-193.[50] Bohl DD, Shen MR, Mayo BC, Massel DH, Long WW, Modi KD,et al. Malnutrition predicts infectious and wound complications following posterior lumbar spinal fusion. Spine 2016;41:1693¡V9.https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000001591.[51] Adogwa O, Martin JR, Huang K, Verla T, Fatemi P, Thompson P,et al. Preoperative serum albumin level as a predictor of postoperative complication after spine fusion. Spine 2014;39:1513¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000000450.[52] Adogwa O, Elsamadicy AA, Mehta AI, Cheng J, Bagley CA, Karikari IO. Preoperative nutritional status is an independent predictorof 30-day hospital readmission after elective spine surgery. Spine2016;41:1400¡V4. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000001551.[53] Elsamadicy AA, Adogwa O, Vuong VD, Mehta AI, Vasquez RA,Cheng J, et al. Patient body mass index is an independent predictor of30-day hospital readmission after elective spine surgery. World Neurosurg 2016;96:148¡V51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2016.08.097.[54] Hussain AK, Cheung ZB, Vig KS, Phan K, Lima MC, Kim JS, et al.Hypoalbuminemia as an independent risk factor for perioperativecomplications following surgical decompression of spinal metastases. Global Spine J 2019;9:321¡V30. https://doi.org/10.1177/2192568218797095.[55] Somani S, Kim JH, Kim J, Leven DM, Lee NJ, Kothari P, et al.Hypoalbuminemia as a risk factor following anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF). The Spine Journal 2016;16:S152.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2016.07.048.[56] Xu B, Xu W-X, Lao Y-J, Ding W-G, Lu D, Sheng H-F. Multimodalnutritional management in primary lumbar spine surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Spine 2019;44:967¡V74. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000002992.[57] Nieuwenhuizen WF, Weenen H, Rigby P, Hetherington MM. Olderadults and patients in need of nutritional support: review of currenttreatment options and factors influencing nutritional intake. ClinNutr 2010;29:160¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2009.09.003.[58] Gr?nkj?r M, Eliasen M, Skov-Ettrup LS, Tolstrup JS, Christiansen AH,Mikkelsen SS, et al. Preoperative smoking status and postoperative complications: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg 2014;259:52¡V71. https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0b013e3182911913.[59] Kerr D, Zhao W, Lurie JD. What are long-term predictors of outcomes for lumbar disc herniation? A randomized and observationalstudy. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2014;473:1920¡V30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11999-014-3803-7.[60] Meng F, Cao J, Meng X. Risk factors for surgical site infections following spinal surgery. J Clin Neurosci 2015;22:1862¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2015.03.065.[61] Allegranzi B, Zayed B, Bischoff P, Kubilay NZ, de Jonge S, deVries F, et al. New WHO recommendations on intraoperative and744 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752postoperative measures for surgical site infection prevention: an evidence-based global perspective. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16:e288¡V303. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30402-9.[62] Hermann PC, Webler M, Bornemann R, Jansen TR, Rommelspacher Y, Sander K, et al. Influence of smoking on spinal fusionafter spondylodesis surgery: a comparative clinical study. TechnolHealth Care 2016;24:737¡V44. https://doi.org/10.3233/THC-161164.[63] Blood AG, Sandoval MF, Burger E, Halverson-Carpenter K. Riskand protective factors associated with surgical infections amongspine patients. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2017;18:234¡V49. https://doi.org/10.1089/sur.2016.183.[64] Borde TD, Prasad C, Arimappamagan A, Srinivas D, Somanna S.Incidence of deep venous thrombosis in patients undergoing electiveneurosurgery - a prospective cohort based study. Neurol India2017;65:787¡V93. https://doi.org/10.4103/neuroindia.NI_1237_15.[65] Kong L, Liu Z, Meng F, Shen Y. Smoking and risk of surgical siteinfection after spinal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2017;18:206¡V14. https://doi.org/10.1089/sur.2016.209.[66] Mills E, Eyawo O, Lockhart I, Kelly S, Wu P, Ebbert JO. Smokingcessation reduces postoperative complications: a systematic reviewand meta-analysis. Am J Med 2011;124:144¡V154.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2010.09.013.[67] S?rensen LT. Wound healing and infection in surgery. The clinicalimpact of smoking and smoking cessation: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Arch Surg 2012;147:373¡V83. https://doi.org/10.1001/archsurg.2012.5.[68] Thomsen T, Villebro N, M?ller AM. Interventions for preoperativesmoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD002294.https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD002294.pub4.[69] Berlin NL, Cutter C, Battaglia C. Will preoperative smoking cessation programs generate long-term cessation? A systematic reviewand meta-analysis. Am J Manag Care 2015;21:e623¡V31.[70] Levett DZH, Edwards M, Grocott M, Mythen M. Preparing thepatient for surgery to improve outcomes. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2016;30:145¡V57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpa.2016.04.002.[71] Wong J, Lam DP, Abrishami A, Chan MTV, Chung F. Short-termpreoperative smoking cessation and postoperative complications: asystematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth 2012;59:268¡V79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-011-9652-x.[72] Miwa S, Yokogawa A, Kobayashi T, Nishimura T, Igarashi K, Inatani H, et al. Risk factors of recurrent lumbar disk herniation: a single center study and review of the literature. J Spinal Disord Tech2015;28:E265¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1097/BSD.0b013e31828215b3.[73] Huang W, Han Z, Liu J, Yu L, Yu X. Risk factors for recurrentlumbar disc herniation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e2378. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000002378.[74] Krebs EE, Lurie JD, Fanciullo G, Tosteson TD, Blood EA, CareyTS, et al. Predictors of long-term opioid use among patients withpainful lumbar spine conditions. J Pain 2010;11:44¡V52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2009.05.007.[75] Seicean A, Seicean S, Alan N, Schiltz NK, Rosenbaum BP, JonesPK, et al. Effect of smoking on the perioperative outcomes ofpatients who undergo elective spine surgery. Spine 2013;38:1294¡V302. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e31828e2747.[76] Bydon M, De la Garza-Ramos R, Abt NB, Gokaslan ZL, WolinskyJ-P, Sciubba DM, et al. Impact of smoking on complication andpseudarthrosis rates after single- and 2-level posterolateral fusion ofthe lumbar spine. Spine 2014;39:1765¡V70. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000000527.[77] Hofler RC, Swong K, Martin B, Wemhoff M, Jones GA. Risk ofpseudoarthrosis after spinal fusion: analysis from the healthcare costand utilization project. World Neurosurg 2018;120:e194¡V202.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.08.026.[78] Jackson KL, Devine JG. The effects of smoking and smoking cessation on spine surgery: a systematic review of the literature. GlobalSpine J 2016;6:695¡V701. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0036-1571285.[79] Shabanzadeh DM, S?rensen LT. Alcohol consumption increasespost-operative infection but not mortality: a systematic review andmeta-analysis. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2015;16:657¡V68. https://doi.org/10.1089/sur.2015.009.[80] Fineberg SJ, Nandyala SV, Kurd MF, Marquez-Lara A, NoureldinM, Sankaranarayanan S, et al. Incidence and risk factors for postoperative ileus following anterior, posterior, and circumferential lumbar fusion. Spine J 2014;14:1680¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2013.10.015.[81] Sousa G, Pinho C, Santos A, Abelha FJ. Postoperative delirium inpatients with history of alcohol abuse. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim2017;64:214¡V22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redar.2016.07.009.[82] Egholm JWM, Pedersen B, M?ller AM, Adami J, Juhl CB, T?nnesenH. Perioperative alcohol cessation intervention for postoperative complications. Cochrane Database of System Rev (Online) 2018;2018:CD008343. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008343.pub3.[83] Passias PG, Bortz C, Alas H, Segreto FA, Horn SR, Ihejirika YU,et al. Alcoholism as a predictor for pseudarthrosis in primary spinefusion: an analysis of risk factors and 30-day outcomes for 52,402patients from 2005 to 2013. J Orthop 2019;16:36¡V40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jor.2018.12.011.[84] Oppedal K, M?ller AM, Pedersen B, T?nnesen H. Preoperativealcohol cessation prior to elective surgery. Cochrane Database SystRev 2012:CD008343. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008343.pub2.[85] Miller DC, Schneider BJ, Smith C. Spine intervention society¡¦s patientsafety committee. NPO prior to interventional spine procedures. PainMed 2018;19:2570¡V1. https://doi.org/10.1093/pm/pny121.[86] Fasting S, S?reide E, Raeder JC. Changing preoperative fasting policies. Impact of a national consensus. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand1998;42:1188¡V91. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-6576.1998.tb05275.x.[87] ASA task Force. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and theuse of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures:an updated report by the american society of anesthesiologists taskforce on preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents toreduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anesthesiology 2017;126:376¡V93. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000001452.[88] Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, Smith A, O¡¦Sullivan G, S?reide E, et al.Perioperative fasting in adults and children: guidelines from theEuropean Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol2011;28:556¡V69. https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0b013e3283495ba1.[89] Brady MC, Kinn S, Stuart P, Ness V. Preoperative fasting foradults to prevent perioperative complications. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2003. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004423.[90] Carli F. Physiologic considerations of Enhanced Recovery AfterSurgery (ERAS) programs: implications of the stress response. CanJ Anaesth 2015;62:110¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-014-0264-0.[91] Nygren J, Soop M, Thorell A, Efendic S, Nair KS, Ljungqvist O.Preoperative oral carbohydrate administration reduces postoperativeinsulin resistance. Clin Nutr 1998;17:65¡V71. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0261-5614(98)80307-5.[92] Tran S, Wolever TMS, Errett LE, Ahn H, Mazer CD, Keith M. Preoperative carbohydrate loading in patients undergoing coronaryartery bypass or spinal surgery. Anesth Analg 2013;117:305¡V13.https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e318295e8d1.[93] Dilmen OK, Yentur E, Tunali Y, Balci H, Bahar M. Does preoperative oral carbohydrate treatment reduce the postoperative surgicalstress response in lumbar disc surgery? Clin Neurol Neurosurg2017;153:82¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2016.12.016.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 745[94] Ip HYV, Abrishami A, Peng PWH, Wong J, Chung F. Predictors ofpostoperative pain and analgesic consumption: a qualitative systematic review. Anesthesiology 2009;111:657¡V77. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181aae87a.[95] By the American Geriatrics Society 2015 Beers Criteria Update ExpertPanel. American geriatrics society 2015 updated beers criteria forpotentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am GeriatrSoc 2015;63:2227¡V46. https://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.13702.[96] Gaulton TG, Wunsch H, Gaskins LJ, Leonard CE, Hennessy S, Ashburn M, et al. Preoperative sedative-hypnotic medication use andadverse postoperative outcomes. Ann Surg 2019. https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000003556.[97] Wongkietkachorn A, Wongkietkachorn N, Rhunsiri P. Preoperativeneeds-based education to reduce anxiety, increase satisfaction, anddecrease time spent in day surgery: a randomized controlled trial.World J Surg 2018;42:666¡V74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-017-4207-0.[98] Han C, Kuang M-J, Ma J-X, Ma X-L. The efficacy of preoperativegabapentin in spinal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Pain Physician 2017;20:649¡V61.[99] Liu B, Liu R, Wang L. A meta-analysis of the preoperative use ofgabapentinoids for the treatment of acute postoperative pain following spinal surgery. Medicine (Baltimore) 2017;96:e8031. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000008031.[100] Clevenger B, Richards T. Pre-operative anaemia. Anaesthesia2015;70(Suppl 1):20¡V8 e6-8. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.12918.[101] Kansagra AJ, Stefan MS. Preoperative anemia: evaluation and treatment. Anesthesiol Clin 2016;34:127¡V41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anclin.2015.10.011.[102] Seicean A, Seicean S, Alan N, Schiltz NK, Rosenbaum BP, JonesPK, et al. Preoperative anemia and perioperative outcomes inpatients who undergo elective spine surgery. Spine 2013;38:1331¡V41. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3182912c6b.[103] Fineberg SJ, Oglesby M, Patel AA, Pelton MA, Singh K. Theincidence and mortality of thromboembolic events in lumbarspine surgery. Spine 2013;38:1154¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e318286b7c0.[104] Guan J, Karsy M, Schmidt MH, Bisson EF. Impact of preoperativehematocrit level on length of stay after surgery on the Lumbar spine.Global Spine J 2015;5:391¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0035-1550090.[105] Nouri A, Matur A, Pennington Z, Elson N, Karim Ahmed A, Huq S,et al. Prevalence of anemia and its relationship with neurologicalstatus in patients undergoing surgery for degenerative cervical myelopathy and radiculopathy: a retrospective study of 2 spine centers. JClin Neurosci 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2019.11.027.[106] Mu~noz M, Gomez-Ram?rez S, Cuenca J, Garc?a-Erce JA, IglesiasAparicio D, Haman-Alcober S, et al. Very-short-term perioperativeintravenous iron administration and postoperative outcome in majororthopedic surgery: a pooled analysis of observational data from2547 patients. Transfusion 2014;54:289¡V99. https://doi.org/10.1111/trf.12195.[107] Mu~noz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, Besser M, Habler O, KehletH, et al. International consensus statement on the peri-operativemanagement of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia 2017;72:233¡V47. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.13773.[108] Lasocki S, Krauspe R, von Heymann C, Mezzacasa A, Chainey S,Spahn DR. PREPARE: the prevalence of perioperative anaemia andneed for patient blood management in elective orthopaedic surgery:a multicentre, observational study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2015;32:160¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0000000000000202.[109] Theusinger OM, Kind SL, Seifert B, Borgeat L, Gerber C, Spahn DR.Patient blood management in orthopaedic surgery: a four-year followup of transfusion requirements and blood loss from 2008 to 2011 atthe Balgrist University Hospital in Zurich, Switzerland. Blood Transfus 2014;12:195¡V203. https://doi.org/10.2450/2014.0306-13.[110] Chakravarthy VB, Yokoi H, Coughlin DJ, Manlapaz MR, Krishnaney AA. Development and implementation of a comprehensivespine surgery enhanced recovery after surgery protocol: the Cleveland Clinic experience. Neurosurg Focus 2019;46:E11. https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.1.FOCUS18696.[111] Ali ZS, Flanders TM, Ozturk AK, Malhotra NR, Leszinsky L,McShane BJ, et al. Enhanced recovery after elective spinal and peripheral nerve surgery: pilot study from a single institution. J NeurosurgSpine 2019:1¡V9. https://doi.org/10.3171/2018.9.SPINE18681.[112] Staartjes VE, Wispelaere MP de, Schr?oder ML. Improving recoveryafter elective degenerative spine surgery: 5-year experience with anenhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocol. NeurosurgicalFocus 2019;46:E7. https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.1.FOCUS18646.[113] Anderson PA, Savage JW, Vaccaro AR, Radcliff K, Arnold PM,Lawrence BD, et al. Prevention of surgical site infection in spinesurgery. Neurosurgery 2017;80:S114¡V23. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyw066.[114] Spina NT, Aleem IS, Nassr A, Lawrence BD. Surgical site infections in spine surgery: preoperative prevention strategies to minimize risk. Global Spine J 2018;8:31S¡V6S. https://doi.org/10.1177/2192568217752130.[115] Rubinstein E, Findler G, Amit P, Shaked I. Perioperative prophylactic cephazolin in spinal surgery. A double-blind placebo-controlledtrial. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1994;76:99¡V102.[116] Wimmer C, Nogler M, Frischhut B. Influence of antibiotics oninfection in spinal surgery: a prospective study of 110 patients. JSpinal Disord 1998;11:498¡V500.[117] Hellbusch LC, Helzer-Julin M, Doran SE, Leibrock LG, Long DJ,Puccioni MJ, et al. Single-dose vs multiple-dose antibiotic prophylaxis in instrumented lumbar fusion?a prospective study. Surg Neurol 2008;70:622¡V7 discussion 627. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surneu.2007.08.017.[118] Barker FG. Efficacy of prophylactic antibiotic therapy in spinal surgery: a meta-analysis. Neurosurgery 2002;51:391¡V400. discussion400-401.[119] Shaffer WO, Baisden JL, Fernand R, Matz PG. An evidence-basedclinical guideline for antibiotic prophylaxis in spine surgery. Spine J2013;13:1387¡V92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2013.06.030.[120] Kanayama M, Hashimoto T, Shigenobu K, Oha F, Togawa D. Effective prevention of surgical site infection using a centers for diseasecontrol and prevention guideline?based antimicrobial prophylaxisin lumbar spine surgery. J Neurosurg 2007;6:327¡V9. https://doi.org/10.3171/spi.2007.6.4.7.[121] Lopez WY, Rider SM, Nwosu K, Kazarian ER, Blucher JA, Schoenfeld EM, et al. The impact of vancomycin and cefazolin as standardpreoperative antibiotic prophylaxis on surgical site infections following instrumented spinal fusion. Spine 2019;44:E366¡V71. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000002839.[122] Himebauch AS, Sankar WN, Flynn JM, Sisko MT, Moorthy GS,Gerber JS, et al. Skeletal muscle and plasma concentrations of cefazolin during complex paediatric spinal surgery. Br J Anaesth2016;117:87¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aew032.[123] Makhni MC, Jegede K, Lombardi J, Whittier S, Gorroochurn P,Lehman RA, et al. No clear benefit of chlorhexidine use at homebefore surgical preparation. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2018;26:e39¡V47. https://doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-D-16-00866.[124] Webster J, Osborne S. Preoperative bathing or showering with skinantiseptics to prevent surgical site infection. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2015:CD004985. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004985.pub5.[125] Eiselt D. Presurgical skin preparation with a novel 2% chlorhexidinegluconate cloth reduces rates of surgical site infection in orthopaedic surgical patients. Orthop Nurs 2009;28:141¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1097/NOR.0b013e3181a469db.[126] Bebko SP, Green DM, Awad SS. Effect of a preoperative decontamination protocol on surgical site infections in patients undergoing746 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752elective orthopedic surgery with hardware implantation. JAMASurg 2015;150:390¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2014.3480.[127] Sidhwa F, Itani KMF. Skin preparation before surgery: options andevidence. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2015;16:14¡V23. https://doi.org/10.1089/sur.2015.010.[128] Ghobrial GM, Wang MY, Green BA, Levene HB, Manzano G,Vanni S, et al. Preoperative skin antisepsis with chlorhexidine gluconate versus povidone-iodine: a prospective analysis of 6959 consecutive spinal surgery patients. J Neurosurg Spine 2018;28:209¡V14. https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.5.SPINE17158.[129] Yoshii T, Hirai T, Yamada T, Sakai K, Ushio S, Egawa S, et al. Aprospective comparative study in skin antiseptic solutions for posterior spine surgeries: chlorhexidine-gluconate ethanol versus povidone-iodine. Clin Spine Surg 2018;31:E353¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1097/BSD.0000000000000654.[130] Swenson BR, Hedrick TL, Metzger R, Bonatti H, Pruett TL, SawyerRG. Effects of preoperative skin preparation on postoperativewound infection rates: a prospective study of 3 skin preparation protocols. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009;30:964¡V71. https://doi.org/10.1086/605926.[131] Darouiche RO, Wall MJ, Itani KMF, Otterson MF, Webb AL, Carrick MM, et al. Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidone-iodine forsurgical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:18¡V26. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0810988.[132] Yasuda T, Hasegawa T, Yamato Y, Kobayashi S, Togawa D, ArimaH, et al. Optimal timing of preoperative skin preparation with povidone-iodine for spine surgery: a prospective, randomized controlledstudy. Asian Spine J 2015;9:423¡V6. https://doi.org/10.4184/asj.2015.9.3.423.[133] Wahood W, Yolcu Y, Alvi MA, Goyal A, Long TR, Bydon M.Assessing the differences in outcomes between general and nongeneral anesthesia in spine surgery: Results from a national registry.Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2019;180:79¡V86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2019.03.021.[134] Yoshimoto H, Nagashima K, Sato S, Hyakumachi T, YanagibashiY, Masuda T. A prospective evaluation of anesthesia for posteriorlumbar spine fusion: the effectiveness of preoperative epidural anesthesia with morphine. Spine 2005;30:863¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000158879.26544.69.[135] Kakiuchi M. Reduction of blood loss during spinal surgery by epiduralblockade under normotensive general anesthesia. Spine 1997;22:889¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199704150-00012.[136] Brown CH, Jones EL, Lin C, Esmaili M, Gorashi Y, Skelton RA,et al. Shaping anesthetic techniques to reduce post-operative delirium (SHARP) study: a protocol for a prospective pragmatic randomized controlled trial to evaluate spinal anesthesia with targetedsedation compared with general anesthesia in older adults undergoing lumbar spine fusion surgery. BMC Anesthesiol 2019;19:192.https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-019-0867-7.[137] Gille O, Obeid I, Degrise C, Guerin P, Skalli W, Vital J-M. Theuse of curare during anesthesia to prevent iatrogenic muscledamage caused by lumbar spinal surgery through a posteriorapproach. Spine 2007;32:402¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000255077.54766.59.[138] Konstantopoulos K, Makris A, Moustaka A, Karmaniolou I, Konstantopoulos G, Mela A. Sevoflurane versus propofol anesthesia inpatients undergoing lumbar spondylodesis: a randomized trial. JSurg Res 2013;179:72¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.09.038.[139] Pacreu S, Fernandez Candil J, Molto L, Carazo J, Fernandez Galinski S. The perioperative combination of methadone and ketaminereduces post-operative opioid usage compared with methadonealone. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2012;56:1250¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-6576.2012.02743.x.[140] Song Y, Shim J-K, Song J-W, Kim E-K, Kwak Y-L. Dexmedetomidine added to an opioid-based analgesic regimen for the preventionof postoperative nausea and vomiting in highly susceptible patients:a randomised controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2016;33:75¡V83.https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0000000000000327.[141] Hwang W, Lee J, Park J, Joo J. Dexmedetomidine versus remifentanil in postoperative pain control after spinal surgery: a randomizedcontrolled study. BMC Anesthesiol 2015;15:21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-015-0004-1.[142] Guest JD, Vanni S, Silbert L. Mild hypothermia, blood loss andcomplications in elective spinal surgery. Spine J 2004;4:130¡V7.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2003.08.027.[143] Kurz A. Thermal care in the perioperative period. Best Pract Res ClinAnaesthesiol 2008;22:39¡V62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpa.2007.10.004.[144] Sajid MS, Shakir AJ, Khatri K, Baig MK. The role of perioperativewarming in surgery: a systematic review. Sao Paulo Med J 2009;127:231¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1590/S1516-31802009000400009.[145] Lee HK, Jang Y-H, Choi K-W, Lee JH. The effect of electricallyheated humidifier on the body temperature and blood loss in spinalsurgery under general anesthesia. Korean J Anesthesiol 2011;61:112¡V6. https://doi.org/10.4097/kjae.2011.61.2.112.[146] Ousey K, Edward K-L, Lui S, Stephenson J, Walker K, Duff J, et al.Perioperative, local and systemic warming in surgical site infection:a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Wound Care 2017;26:614¡V24. https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2017.26.11.614.[147] Steelman VM, Chae S, Duff J, Anderson MJ, Zaidi A. Warming ofirrigation fluids for prevention of perioperative hypothermia duringarthroscopy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arthroscopy2018;34:930¡V42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arthro.2017.09.024.[148] Overview | Intravenous fluid therapy in adults in hospital | Guidance| NICE n.d. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg174 (accessed February 16, 2020).[149] Andrzejowski J, Hoyle J, Eapen G, Turnbull D. Effect of prewarming on post-induction core temperature and the incidence of inadvertent perioperative hypothermia in patients undergoing generalanaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2008;101:627¡V31. https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aen272.[150] Pikus E, Hooper VD. Postoperative rewarming: are there alternatives to warm hospital blankets. J Perianesth Nurs 2010;25:11¡V23.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jopan.2009.12.004.[151] Jin Y, Tian J, Sun M, Yang K. A systematic review of randomisedcontrolled trials of the effects of warmed irrigation fluid on corebody temperature during endoscopic surgeries. J Clin Nurs2011;20:305¡V16. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03484.x.[152] Moola S, Lockwood C. Effectiveness of strategies for the management and/or prevention of hypothermia within the adult perioperative environment. Int J Evid Based Healthc 2011;9:337¡V45. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-1609.2011.00227.x.[153] Alderson P, Campbell G, Smith AF, Warttig S, Nicholson A, LewisSR. Thermal insulation for preventing inadvertent perioperativehypothermia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD009908. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009908.pub2.[154] Campbell G, Alderson P, Smith AF, Warttig S. Warming of intravenous and irrigation fluids for preventing inadvertent perioperativehypothermia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD009891. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009891.pub2.[155] Park B, Lee T, Berger K, Park SM, Choi K-E, Goodsell TM, et al.Efficacy of nonpharmacological antishivering interventions: a systematic analysis. Crit Care Med 2015;43:1757¡V66. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000001014.[156] Madrid E, Urrutia G, Roque i Figuls M, Pardo-Hernandez H, Campos JM, Paniagua P, et al. Active body surface warming systems forpreventing complications caused by inadvertent perioperative hypothermia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;4:CD009016.https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009016.pub2.[157] Connelly L, Cramer E, DeMott Q, Piperno J, Coyne B, Winfield C,et al. The optimal time and method for surgical prewarming: a comprehensive review of the literature. J Perianesth Nurs 2017;32:199¡V209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jopan.2015.11.010.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 747[158] Yang H-L, Lee H-F, Chu T-L, Su Y-Y, Ho L-H, Fan J-Y. The comparison of two recovery room warming methods for hypothermiapatients who had undergone spinal surgery. J Nurs Scholarsh2012;44:2¡V10. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-5069.2011.01426.x.[159] Nieh H-C, Su S-F. Meta-analysis: effectiveness of forced-air warming for prevention of perioperative hypothermia in surgical patients.J Adv Nurs 2016;72:2294¡V314. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13010.[160] Shaw CA, Steelman VM, DeBerg J, Schweizer ML. Effectiveness ofactive and passive warming for the prevention of inadvertent hypothermia in patients receiving neuraxial anesthesia: a systematic review andmeta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Anesth 2017;38:93¡V104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2017.01.005.[161] McGirt MJ, Parker SL, Mummaneni P, Knightly J, Pfortmiller D,Foley K, et al. Is the use of minimally invasive fusion technologiesassociated with improved outcomes after elective interbody lumbarfusion?. Analysis of a nationwide prospective patient-reported outcomes registry Spine J 2017;17:922¡V32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2017.02.003.[162] Wang MY, Chang HK, Grossman J. Reduced acute care costs withthe ERAS minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbodyfusion compared with conventional minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. Neurosurgery 2018;83:827¡V34. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyx400.[163] Wang MY, Grossman J. Endoscopic minimally invasive transforaminal interbody fusion without general anesthesia: initial clinicalexperience with 1-year follow-up. Neurosurg Focus 2016;40:E13.https://doi.org/10.3171/2015.11.FOCUS15435.[164] France JC, Jorgenson SS, Lowe TG, Dwyer AP. The use of intrathecal morphine for analgesia after posterolateral lumbar fusion: a prospective, double-blind, randomized study. Spine 1997;22:2272¡V7.https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199710010-00015.[165] Yukawa Y, Kato F, Ito K, Terashima T, Horie Y. A prospective randomized study of preemptive analgesia for postoperative pain in thepatients undergoing posterior lumbar interbody fusion: continuoussubcutaneous morphine, continuous epidural morphine, and diclofenac sodium. Spine 2005;30:2357¡V61. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000184377.31427.fa.[166] Ziegeler S, Fritsch E, Bauer C, Mencke T, M?uller BI, Soltesz S,et al. Therapeutic effect of intrathecal morphine after posterior lumbar interbody fusion surgery: a prospective, double-blind, randomized study. Spine 2008;33:2379¡V86. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181844ef2.[167] Techanivate A, Kiatgungwanglia P, Yingsakmongkol W. Spinalmorphine for post-operative analgesia after lumbar laminectomywith fusion. J Med Assoc Thai 2003;86:262¡V9.[168] Boezaart AP, Eksteen JA, Spuy GV, Rossouw P, Knipe M. Intrathecal morphine. Double-blind evaluation of optimal dosage for analgesia after major lumbar spinal surgery. Spine 1999;24:1131¡V7.https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199906010-00013.[169] Firouzian A, Gholipour Baradari A, Ehteshami S, Zamani Kiasari A,Shafizad M, Shafiei S, et al. The effect of ultra-low-dose intrathecalnaloxone on pain intensity after lumbar laminectomy with spinalfusion: a randomized controlled trial. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol2020;32:70¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1097/ANA.0000000000000537.[170] Araimo Morselli FSM, Zuccarini F, Caporlingua F, Scarpa I, Imperiale C, Caporlingua A, et al. Intrathecal versus intravenous morphine in minimally invasive posterior lumbar fusion: a blindedrandomized comparative prospective study. SPINE 2017;42:281¡V4.https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000001733.[171] Chan JHH, Heilpern GNA, Packham I, Trehan RK, Marsh GDJ, KnibbAA. A prospective randomized double-blind trial of the use of intrathecal fentanyl in patients undergoing lumbar spinal surgery. Spine 2006;31:2529¡V33. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000241135.79983.52.[172] Kang H, Jung HJ, Lee JS, Yang JJ, Shin HY, Song K-S. Early postoperative analgesic effects of a single epidural injection of ropivacaine administered preoperatively in posterior lumbar interbodyspinal arthrodesis: a pilot randomized controlled trial. J Bone JointSurg Am 2013;95:393¡V9. https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.K.01729.[173] Choi S, Rampersaud YR, Chan VWS, Persaud O, Koshkin A, Tumber P, et al. The addition of epidural local anesthetic to systemicmultimodal analgesia following lumbar spinal fusion: a randomizedcontrolled trial. Can J Anaesth 2014;61:330¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-014-0115-z.[174] Schenk MR, Putzier M, K?ugler B, Tohtz S, Voigt K, Schink T, et al.Postoperative analgesia after major spine surgery: patient-controlledepidural analgesia versus patient-controlled intravenous analgesia.Anesth Analg 2006;103:1311¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ane/0000247966.49492.72.[175] Unterrainer AF, Al-Schameri AR, Piotrowski WP, KrombholzReindl MA, Schmid AL, Hitzl W. Opioid sparing effect of epidurallevobupivacaine on postoperative pain treatment in major spinal surgery. Middle East J Anaesthesiol 2008;19:781¡V8.[176] Park SY, An HS, Lee SH, Suh SW, Kim JL, Yoon SJ. A prospectiverandomized comparative study of postoperative pain control usingan epidural catheter in patients undergoing posterior lumbar interbody fusion. Eur Spine J 2016;25:1601¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-016-4385-8.[177] Cohen BE, Hartman MB, Wade JT, Miller JS, Gilbert R, ChapmanTM. Postoperative pain control after lumbar spine fusion. Patientcontrolled analgesia versus continuous epidural analgesia. Spine1997;22:1892¡V6 discussion 1896-1897. https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199708150-00016.[178] Fisher CG, Belanger L, Gofton EG, Umedaly HS, Noonan VK,Abramson C, et al. Prospective randomized clinical trial comparingpatient-controlled intravenous analgesia with patient-controlled epidural analgesia after lumbar spinal fusion. Spine 2003;28:739¡V43.[179] Wenk M, Liljenqvist U, Kaulingfrecks T, Gurlit S, Ermert T,P?opping DM, et al. Intra- versus postoperative initiation of pain control via a thoracic epidural catheter for lumbar spinal fusion surgery.Minerva Anestesiol 2018;84:796¡V802. https://doi.org/10.23736/S0375-9393.17.12136-X.[180] Vineyard JC, Toohey JS, Neidre A, Fogel G, Joyner R. Evaluationof a single-dose, extended-release epidural morphine formulationfor pain control after lumbar spine surgery. J Surg Orthop Adv2014;23:9¡V12. https://doi.org/10.3113/jsoa.2014.0009.[181] Chen K, Wang L, Ning M, Dou L, Li W, Li Y. Evaluation of ultrasound-guided lateral thoracolumbar interfascial plane block forpostoperative analgesia in lumbar spine fusion surgery: a prospective, randomized, and controlled clinical trial. PeerJ 2019;7:e7967.https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.7967.[182] Ortega-Garc?a FJ, Garc?a-Del-Pino I, Au~non-Mart?n I, CarrascosaFernandez AJ. Utility of percutaneous catheters for local anaesthetics infusion for postoperative pain control in lumbar arthrodesis.A prospective cohort study. Rev Esp Cir Ortop Traumatol2018;62:365¡V72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.recot.2018.01.007.[183] Jirarattanaphochai K, Jung S, Thienthong S, Krisanaprakornkit W,Sumananont C. Peridural methylprednisolone and wound infiltrationwith bupivacaine for postoperative pain control after posterior lumbar spine surgery: a randomized double-blinded placebo-controlledtrial. Spine 2007;32:609¡V16 discussion 617. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000257541.91728.a1.[184] Bianconi M, Ferraro L, Ricci R, Zanoli G, Antonelli T, Giulia B,et al. The pharmacokinetics and efficacy of ropivacaine continuouswound instillation after spine fusion surgery. Anesth Analg2004;98:166¡V72 table of contents. https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ane.0000093310.47375.44.[185] Li J, Yang J-S, Dong B-H, Ye J-M. The effect of dexmedetomidineadded to preemptive ropivacaine infiltration on postoperative painafter lumbar fusion surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Spine2019;44:1333¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000003096.[186] Abdel Hay J, Kobaiter-Maarrawi S, Tabet P, Moussa R, Rizk T,Nohra G, et al. Bupivacaine field block with clonidine for748 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752postoperative pain control in posterior spine approaches: a randomized double-blind trial. Neurosurgery 2018;82:790¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyx313.[187] Martin TD, Lorenz T, Ferraro J, Chagin K, Lampman RM, EmeryKL, et al. Newly implemented enhanced recovery pathway positively impacts hospital length of stay. Surg Endosc 2016;30:4019¡V28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-015-4714-8.[188] Funcke S, Saugel B, Koch C, Schulte D, Zajonz T, Sander M, et al.Individualized, perioperative, hemodynamic goal-directed therapyin major abdominal surgery (iPEGASUS trial): study protocol for arandomized controlled trial. Trials 2018;19:273. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-018-2620-9.[189] Lechat J-P, Van der Linden P. Fluid therapy in the intraoperativesetting. Transfus Apher Sci 2019;58:408¡V11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transci.2019.06.016.[190] Bampoe S, Odor PM, Dushianthan A, Bennett-Guerrero E, Cro S,Gan TJ, et al. Perioperative administration of buffered versus nonbuffered crystalloid intravenous fluid to improve outcomes following adult surgical procedures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;9:CD004089. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004089.pub3.[191] Bacchin MR, Ceria CM, Giannone S, Ghisi D, Stagni G, Greggi T,et al. Goal-directed fluid therapy based on stroke volume variationin patients undergoing major spine surgery in the prone position: acohort study. Spine 2016;41:E1131¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000001601.[192] Koraki E, Stachtari C, Stergiouda Z, Stamatopoulou M, GkiouliavaA, Sifaki F, et al. Blood and fluid management during scoliosis surgery: a single-center retrospective analysis. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00590-020-02637-y.[193] Kiely PD, Mount LE, Du JY, Nguyen JT, Weitzman G, MemstoudisS, et al. The incidence and risk factors for post-operative ileus afterspinal fusion surgery: a multivariate analysis. Int Orthop2016;40:1067¡V74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00264-016-3148-9.[194] Munch JL, Zusman NL, Lieberman EG, Stucke RS, Bell C, PhilippTC, et al. A scoring system to predict postoperative medical complications in high-risk patients undergoing elective thoracic and lumbararthrodesis. Spine J 2016;16:694¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2015.07.442.[195] Song JW, Shim J-K, Kim NY, Jang J, Kwak Y-L. The effect of 0.9%saline versus plasmalyte on coagulation in patients undergoing lumbar spinal surgery; a randomized controlled trial. Int J Surg2015;20:128¡V34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2015.06.065.[196] Gruskay JA, Fu M, Bohl DD, Webb ML, Grauer JN. Factors affecting length of stay after elective posterior lumbar spine surgery: amultivariate analysis. Spine J 2015;15:1188¡V95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2013.10.022.[197] Jang M-S, Han J-H, Lee S, Kim S-E. Postoperative blood loss and coagulation changes after balanced 6% hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 administration during spine surgery: a retrospective study. Clin Spine Surg2019;32:E65¡V70. https://doi.org/10.1097/BSD.0000000000000727.[198] Ramchandran S, Day LM, Line B, Buckland AJ, Passias P, Protopsaltis T, et al. The impact of different intraoperative fluid administration strategies on postoperative extubation following multilevelthoracic and lumbar spine surgery: a propensity score matched analysis. Neurosurgery 2019;85:31¡V40. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyy226.[199] Soffin EM, YaDeau JT. Enhanced recovery after surgery for primary hip and knee arthroplasty: a review of the evidence. Br JAnaesth 2016;117 iii62?72. https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aew362.[200] Husted H. Fast-track hip and knee arthroplasty: clinical and organizational aspects. Acta Orthop Suppl 2012;83:1¡V39. https://doi.org/10.3109/17453674.2012.700593.[201] Ibrahim MS, Khan MA, Nizam I, Haddad FS. Peri-operative interventions producing better functional outcomes and enhanced recovery following total hip and knee arthroplasty: an evidence-basedreview. BMC Med 2013;11:37. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-11-37.[202] Baldini G, Bagry H, Aprikian A, Carli F. Postoperative urinary retention: anesthetic and perioperative considerations. Anesthesiology2009;110:1139¡V57. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e31819f7aea.[203] Lonjon G, Dauzac C, Fourniols E, Guigui P, Bonnomet F, Bonnevialle P. Early surgical site infections in adult spinal trauma: a prospective, multicentre study of infection rates and risk factors.Orthop Traumatol: Surg Res 2012;98:788¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.otsr.2012.07.006.[204] Altschul D, Kobets A, Nakhla J, Jada A, Nasser R, Kinon MD, et al.Postoperative urinary retention in patients undergoing elective spinal surgery. J Neurosurg Spine 2017;26:229¡V34. https://doi.org/10.3171/2016.8.SPINE151371.[205] Golubovsky JL, Ilyas H, Chen J, Tanenbaum JE, Mroz TE, Steinmetz MP. Risk factors and associated complications for postoperative urinary retention after lumbar surgery for lumbar spinalstenosis. Spine J 2018;18:1533¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2018.01.022.[206] Jackson J, Davies P, Leggett N, Nugawela MD, Scott LJ, Leach V,et al. Systematic review of interventions for the prevention andtreatment of postoperative urinary retention. BJS Open 2018;3:11¡V23. https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs5.50114.[207] Wang MY, Chang P-Y, Grossman J. Development of an enhancedrecovery after surgery (ERAS) approach for lumbar spinal fusion. JNeurosurg Spine 2017;26:411¡V8. https://doi.org/10.3171/2016.9.SPINE16375.[208] Yang M, Riva-Cambrin J, Cunningham J, Jette N, Sajobi T, Soroceanu A, et al. Development and validation of a clinical predictionscore for poor postoperative pain control following elective spinesurgery. J Neurosurg Spine 2020. (in Press).[209] Farag E, Ghobrial M, Sessler DI, Dalton JE, Liu J, Lee JH, et al.Effect of perioperative intravenous lidocaine administration onpain, opioid consumption, and quality of life after complex spinesurgery. Anesthesiology 2013;119:932¡V40. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e318297d4a5.[210] Walker CT, Gullotti DM, Prendergast V, Radosevich J, Grimm D,Cole TS, et al. Implementation of a standardized multimodal postoperative analgesia protocol improves pain control, reduces opioidconsumption, and shortens length of hospital stay after posteriorlumbar spinal fusion. Neurosurgery 2019. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuros/nyz312.[211] Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G, Cox BPBW, Fearon KCH, Feldman LS, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) for gastrointestinal surgery, part 2: consensus statement for anaesthesia practice.Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2016;60:289¡V334. https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12651.[212] Grundmann U, W?ornle C, Biedler A, Kreuer S, Wrobel M, WilhelmW. The efficacy of the non-opioid analgesics parecoxib, paracetamol and metamizol for postoperative pain relief after lumbar microdiscectomy. Anesth Analg 2006;103:217¡V22 table of contents.https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ane.0000221438.08990.06.[213] Karst M, Kegel T, Lukas A, L?udemann W, Hussein S, PiepenbrockS. Effect of celecoxib and dexamethasone on postoperative painafter lumbar disc surgery. Neurosurgery 2003;53:331¡V6 discussion336-337. https://doi.org/10.1227/01.neu.0000073530.81765.6b.[214] Jirarattanaphochai K, Jung S. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugsfor postoperative pain management after lumbar spine surgery: ameta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Neurosurg Spine2008;9:22¡V31. https://doi.org/10.3171/SPI/2008/9/7/022.[215] Jirarattanaphochai K, Thienthong S, Sriraj W, Jung S, Pulnitiporn A,Lertsinudom S, et al. Effect of parecoxib on postoperative pain afterlumbar spine surgery: a bicenter, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Spine 2008;33:132¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181604529.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 749[216] Zhang Z, Xu H, Zhang Y, Li W, Yang Y, Han T, et al. Nonsteroidalanti-inflammatory drugs for postoperative pain control after lumbarspine surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. JClin Anesth 2017;43:84¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2017.08.030.[217] Fracon RN, Teofilo JM, Satin RB, Lamano T. Prostaglandins andbone: potential risks and benefits related to the use of nonsteroidalanti-inflammatory drugs in clinical dentistry. J Oral Sci 2008;50:247¡V52. https://doi.org/10.2334/josnusd.50.247.[218] Sivaganesan A, Chotai S, White-Dzuro G, McGirt MJ, Devin CJ.The effect of NSAIDs on spinal fusion: a cross-disciplinary reviewof biochemical, animal, and human studies. Eur Spine J 2017;26:2719¡V28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-017-5021-y.[219] Cheung CW, Qiu Q, Ying ACL, Choi SW, Law WL, Irwin MG. Theeffects of intra-operative dexmedetomidine on postoperative pain,side-effects and recovery in colorectal surgery. Anaesthesia 2014;69:1214¡V21. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.12759.[220] Kranke P, Jokinen J, Pace NL, Schnabel A, Hollmann MW, Hahnenkamp K, et al. Continuous intravenous perioperative lidocaineinfusion for postoperative pain and recovery. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2015:CD009642. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD009642.pub2.[221] Ge D-J, Qi B, Tang G, Li J-Y. Intraoperative dexmedetomidine promotes postoperative analgesia and recovery in patients after abdominal hysterectomy: a double-blind. Randomized Clinical Trial. SciRep 2016;6:21514. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21514.[222] Hill RP, Lubarsky DA, Phillips-Bute B, Fortney JT, Creed MR, GlassPS, et al. Cost-effectiveness of prophylactic antiemetic therapy withondansetron, droperidol, or placebo. Anesthesiology 2000;92:958¡V67.https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-200004000-00012.[223] Gan TJ, Diemunsch P, Habib AS, Kovac A, Kranke P, Meyer TA,et al. Consensus guidelines for the management of postoperativenausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2014;118:85¡V113. https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000000002.[224] Swann MC, Hoes KS, Aoun SG, McDonagh DL. Postoperativecomplications of spine surgery. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol2016;30:103¡V20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpa.2016.01.002.[225] Sarin P, Urman RD, Ohno-Machado L. An improved model for predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting in ambulatory surgerypatients using physician-modifiable risk factors. J Am Med InformAssoc 2012;19:995¡V1002. https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2012-000872.[226] Apfel CC, L?a?ar?a E, Koivuranta M, Greim CA, Roewer N. Asimplified risk score for predicting postoperative nausea andvomiting: conclusions from cross-validations between two centers. Anesthesiology 1999;91:693¡V700. https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199909000-00022.[227] Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, Shilling A, Shi Y-Y, LeslieJB, et al. Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea and vomiting afterambulatory surgery? Anesthesiology 2012;117:475¡V86. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e318267ef31.[228] Eberhart LHJ, Mauch M, Morin AM, Wulf H, Geldner G. Impact of amultimodal anti-emetic prophylaxis on patient satisfaction in high-riskpatients for postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anaesthesia 2002;57:1022¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2044.2002.02822.x.[229] Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, Kerger H, Turan A, Vedder I,et al. A factorial trial of six interventions for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2441¡V51.https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa032196.[230] von Eckardstein KL, Dohmes JE, Rohde V. Use of closed suctiondevices and other drains in spinal surgery: results of an online, Germany-wide questionnaire. Eur Spine J 2016;25:708¡V15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-015-3790-8.[231] Zeng X-J, Wang W, Zhao Z, Li M. Causes and preventive measures ofsymptomatic spinal epidural haematoma after spinal surgery. Int Orthop2017;41:1395¡V403. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00264-017-3506-2.[232] Payne DH, Fischgrund JS, Herkowitz HN, Barry RL, Kurz LT,Montgomery DM. Efficacy of closed wound suction drainage aftersingle-level lumbar laminectomy. J Spinal Disord 1996;9:401¡V3.[233] Brown MD, Brookfield KFW. A randomized study of closed woundsuction drainage for extensive lumbar spine surgery. Spine 2004;29:1066¡V8. https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-200405150-00003.[234] Mirzai H, Eminoglu M, Orguc S. Are drains useful for lumbar disc surgery? A prospective, randomized clinical study. J Spinal Disord Tech2006;19:171¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.bsd.0000190560.20872.a7.[235] Kanayama M, Oha F, Togawa D, Shigenobu K, Hashimoto T. Isclosed-suction drainage necessary for single-level lumbar decompression?: review of 560 cases. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2010;468:2690¡V4. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11999-010-1235-6.[236] Weinstein MA, McCabe JP, Cammisa FP. Postoperative spinalwound infection: a review of 2,391 consecutive index procedures. JSpinal Disord 2000;13:422¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002517-200010000-00009.[237] Scuderi GJ, Brusovanik GV, Fitzhenry LN, Vaccaro AR. Is wounddrainage necessary after lumbar spinal fusion surgery? Med SciMonit 2005;11:CR64¡V6.[238] Lai Q, Song Q, Guo R, Bi H, Liu X, Yu X, et al. Risk factors foracute surgical site infections after lumbar surgery: a retrospectivestudy. J Orthop Surg Res 2017;12:116. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-017-0612-1.[239] Adogwa O, Elsamadicy AA, Sergesketter AR, Shammas RL, VatsiaS, Vuong VD, et al. Post-operative drain use in patients undergoingdecompression and fusion: incidence of complications and symptomatic hematoma. J Spine Surg 2018;4:220¡V6. https://doi.org/10.21037/jss.2018.05.09.[240] Liu J-M, Chen W-Z, Fu B-Q, Chen J-W, Liu Z-L, Huang S-H. Theuse of closed suction drainage in lumbar spinal surgery: is it reallynecessary? World Neurosurg 2016;90:109¡V15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2016.02.091.[241] Patel SB, Griffiths-Jones W, Jones CS, Samartzis D, Clarke AJ,Khan S, et al. The current state of the evidence for the use of drainsin spinal surgery: systematic review. Eur Spine J 2017;26:2729¡V38.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-017-4983-0.[242] Parker MJ, Livingstone V, Clifton R, McKee A. Closed suction surgical wound drainage after orthopaedic surgery. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2007:CD001825. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001825.pub2.[243] Ho C, Sucato DJ, Richards BS. Risk factors for the development ofdelayed infections following posterior spinal fusion and instrumentation in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients. Spine 2007;32:2272¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e31814b1c0b.[244] Hung P-I, Chang M-C, Chou P-H, Lin H-H, Wang S-T, Liu C-L. Is adrain tube necessary for minimally invasive lumbar spine fusion surgery?Eur Spine J 2017;26:733¡V7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00586-016-4672-4.[245] Mosenthal WP, Landy DC, Boyajian HH, Idowu OA, Shi LL, RamosE, et al. Thromboprophylaxis in spinal surgery. Spine 2018;43:E474¡V81. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000002379.[246] Glotzbecker MP, Bono CM, Wood KB, Harris MB. Thromboembolic disease in spinal surgery: a systematic review. Spine 2009;34:291¡V303. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e318195601d.[247] Bono CM, Watters WC, Heggeness MH, Resnick DK, Shaffer WO,Baisden J, et al. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the use ofantithrombotic therapies in spine surgery. Spine J 2009;9:1046¡V51.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2009.09.005.[248] Gruber UF, Rem J, Meisner C, Gratzl O. Prevention of thromboembolic complications with miniheparin-dihydroergotamine in patientsundergoing lumbar disc operations. Eur Arch Psychiatry Neurol Sci1984;234:157¡V61. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00461554.[249] Voth D, Schwarz M, Hahn K, Dei-Anang K, al Butmeh S, Wolf H.Prevention of deep vein thrombosis in neurosurgical patients: a prospective double-blind comparison of two prophylactic regimen. Neurosurg Rev 1992;15:289¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00257808.750 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752[250] Du W, Zhao C, Wang J, Liu J, Shen B, Zheng Y. Comparison ofrivaroxaban and parnaparin for preventing venous thromboembolism after lumbar spine surgery. J Orthop Surg Res 2015;10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-015-0223-7.[251] Epstein NE. Intermittent pneumatic compression stocking prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis in anterior cervical spinal surgery: a prospective efficacy study in 200 patients and literaturereview. Spine 2005;30:2538¡V43. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000186318.80139.40.[252] Fang MC, Maselli J, Lurie JD, Lindenauer PK, Pekow PS, AuerbachAD. Use and outcomes of venous thromboembolism prophylaxisafter spinal fusion surgery. J Thromb Haemost 2011;9:1318¡V25.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04326.x.[253] Epstein NE. Efficacy of pneumatic compression stocking prophylaxis in the prevention of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonaryembolism following 139 lumbar laminectomies with instrumentedfusions. J Spinal Disord Tech 2006;19:28¡V31. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.bsd.0000173454.71657.02.[254] Zeng X-J, Peng H. Prevention of thromboembolic complicationsafter spine surgery by the use of low-molecular-weight heparin.World Neurosurg 2017;104:856¡V62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2017.05.050.[255] Jacobs LJ, Woods BI, Chen AF, Lunardini DJ, Hohl JB, Lee JY.Safety of thromboembolic chemoprophylaxis in spinal traumapatients requiring surgical stabilization. Spine 2013;38:E1041¡V7.https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e31829879cc.[256] Fawi HMT, Saba K, Cunningham A, Masud S, Lewis M, Hossain M,et al. Venous thromboembolism in adult elective spinal surgery: a tertiary centre review of 2181 patients. Bone Joint J 2017;99-B:1204¡V9.https://doi.org/10.1302/0301-620X.99B9.BJJ-2016-1193.R2.[257] De la Garza Ramos R, Longo M, Gelfand Y, Echt M, Kinon MD, Yassari R. Timing of prophylactic anticoagulation and its effect on thromboembolic events after surgery for metastatic tumors of the spine. Spine2019;44:E650¡V5. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000002944.[258] Yang S-D, Liu H, Sun Y-P, Yang D-L, Shen Y, Feng S-Q, et al.Prevalence and risk factors of deep vein thrombosis in patients afterspine surgery: a retrospective case-cohort study. Sci Rep 2015;5:11834. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11834.[259] Weber B, Seal A, McGirr J, Fielding K. Case series of electiveinstrumented posterior lumbar spinal fusions demonstrating a lowincidence of venous thromboembolism. ANZ Journal of Surgery2016;86:796¡V800. https://doi.org/10.1111/ans.12702.[260] Dearborn JT, Hu SS, Tribus CB, Bradford DS. Thromboembolic complications after major thoracolumbar spine surgery. Spine 1999;24:1471¡V6. https://doi.org/10.1097/00007632-199907150-00013.[261] Piasecki DP, Poynton AR, Mintz DN, Roh JS, Peterson MGE, Rawlins BA, et al. Thromboembolic disease after combined anterior/posterior reconstruction for adult spinal deformity: a prospective cohortstudy using magnetic resonance venography. Spine 2008;33:668¡V72. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e318166dfa3.[262] Cheng JS, Arnold PM, Anderson PA, Fischer D, Dettori JR. Anticoagulation risk in spine surgery. Spine 2010;35:S117¡V24. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181d833d4.[263] Yoshioka K, Murakami H, Demura S, Kato S, Hayashi H, Inoue K,et al. Comparative study of the prevalence of venous thromboembolism after elective spinal surgery. Orthopedics 2013;36:e223¡V8.https://doi.org/10.3928/01477447-20130122-26.[264] Kim DY, Kobayashi L, Chang D, Fortlage D, Coimbra R. Earlypharmacological venous thromboembolism prophylaxis is safe afteroperative fixation of traumatic spine fractures. Spine 2015;40:299¡V304. https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000000754.[265] Fidelia I, Lamba N, Papatheodorou SI, Yunusa I, O¡¦Neil K, Chun S,et al. Adult spinal deformity surgery: a systematic review of venousthromboprophylaxis and incidence of venous thromboembolicevents. Neurosurg Rev 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10143-019-01095-3.[266] Groot OQ, Ogink PT, Paulino Pereira NR, Ferrone ML, Harris MB,Lozano-Calderon SA, et al. High risk of symptomatic venous thromboembolism after surgery for spine metastatic bone lesions: a retrospective study. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2019;477:1674¡V86. https://doi.org/10.1097/CORR.0000000000000733.[267] Dhillon ES, Khanna R, Cloney M, Roberts H, Cybulski GR, KoskiTR, et al. Timing and risks of chemoprophylaxis after spinal surgery: a single-center experience with 6869 consecutive patients. JNeurosurg Spine 2017;27:681¡V93. https://doi.org/10.3171/2017.3.SPINE161076.[268] Harper CM, Lyles YM. Physiology and complications of bed rest. JAm Geriatr Soc 1988;36:1047¡V54. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.1988.tb04375.x.[269] Epstein NE. A review article on the benefits of early mobilizationfollowing spinal surgery and other medical/surgical procedures.Surg Neurol Int 2014;5:S66¡V73. https://doi.org/10.4103/2152-7806.130674.[270] Burgess LC, Wainwright TW. What is the evidence for early mobilisation in elective spine surgery? A narrative review. Healthcare(Basel) 2019;7. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare7030092.[271] Ferrel J. Obstacles to early mobilization after spinal fusion andeffect on hospital length of stay. Spine J 2013;13:S168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spinee.2013.07.422.[272] Nielsen PR, J?rgensen LD, Dahl B, Pedersen T, T?nnesen H. Prehabilitation and early rehabilitation after spinal surgery: randomizedclinical trial. Clin Rehabil 2010;24:137¡V48. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269215509347432.[273] Tarnanen SP, Neva MH, H?akkinen K, Kankaanp?a?a M, Ylinen J,Kraemer WJ, et al. Neutral spine control exercises in rehabilitationafter lumbar spine fusion. J Strength Cond Res 2014;28:2018¡V25.https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000000334.[274] Shields LBE, Clark L, Glassman SD, Shields CB. Decreasing hospital length of stay following lumbar fusion utilizing multidisciplinarycommittee meetings involving surgeons and other caretakers. SurgNeurol Int 2017;8:5. https://doi.org/10.4103/2152-7806.198732.[275] Ljungqvist O, Thanh NX, Nelson G. ERAS-value based surgery. JSurg Oncol 2017;116:608¡V12. https://doi.org/10.1002/jso.24820.[276] Porter ME, Lee TH. The Strategy That Will Fix Health Care n.d.https://hbr.org/2013/10/the-strategy-that-will-fix-health-care(accessed January 11, 2020).[277] Ripolles-Melchor J, Ram?rez-Rodr?guez JM, Casans-Frances R, Aldecoa C, Abad-Motos A, Logro~no-Egea M, et al. Association betweenuse of enhanced recovery after surgery protocol and postoperativecomplications in colorectal surgery: the postoperative outcomeswithin enhanced recovery after surgery protocol (POWER) study.JAMA Surg 2019. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamasurg.2019.0995.[278] Cunningham BP, Bakker CJ, Parikh HR, Johal H, SwiontkowskiMF. Physician behavior change: a systematic review. J OrthopTrauma 2019;33(Suppl 7):S62¡V72. https://doi.org/10.1097/BOT.0000000000001616.[279] Hu QL, Liu JY, Hobson DB, Cohen ME, Hall BL, Wick EC, et al.Best practices in data use for achieving successful implementationof enhanced recovery pathway. J Am Coll Surg 2019;229:626¡V632.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2019.08.1448.[280] Cohen R, Gooberman-Hill R. Staff experiences of enhanced recoveryafter surgery: systematic review of qualitative studies. BMJ Open2019;9:e022259. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022259.[281] Currie A, Soop M, Demartines N, Fearon K, Kennedy R, LjungqvistO. Enhanced recovery after surgery interactive audit system: 10years¡¦ experience with an international web-based clinical andresearch perioperative care database. Clin Colon Rectal Surg2019;32:75¡V81. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1673357.[282] Verrier J-F, Paget C, Perlier F, Demesmay F. How to introduce aprogram of enhanced recovery after surgery? The experience of theCAPIO group. J Visc Surg 2016;153:S33¡V9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jviscsurg.2016.10.001.B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752 751[283] Jones EL, Wainwright TW, Foster JD, Smith JRA, Middleton RG,Francis NK. A systematic review of patient reported outcomes andpatient experience in enhanced recovery after orthopaedic surgery.Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2014;96:89¡V94. https://doi.org/10.1308/003588414X13824511649571.[284] Sibbern T, Bull Sellevold V, Steindal SA, Dale C, Watt-Watson J,Dihle A. Patients¡¦ experiences of enhanced recovery after surgery: asystematic review of qualitative studies. J Clin Nurs 2017;26:1172¡V88. https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.13456.[285] Liu B, Liu S, Wang Y, Zhao B, Zhao T, Zhao L, et al. Neurosurgicalenhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) programme for electivecraniotomies: are patients satisfied with their experiences? A quantitative and qualitative analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028706.752 B. Debono et al. / The Spine Journal 21 (2021) 729?752