           BREAST

          Consensus Review of Optimal Perioperative Care 
          in Breast Reconstruction: Enhanced Recovery 
     Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 after Surgery (ERAS) Society Recommendations
   hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025
          Claire Temple-Oberle, M.D., 
                                        Background:  Enhanced  recovery  following  surgery  can  be  achieved  through 
                                M.Sc.
                                        the introduction of evidence-based perioperative maneuvers. This review aims 
              Melissa A. Shea-Budgell,  to present a consensus for optimal perioperative management of patients un-
                                M.Sc.   dergoing breast reconstructive surgery and to provide evidence-based recom-
                      Mark Tan, M.D.    mendations for an enhanced perioperative protocol.
                John L. Semple, M.D.,   Methods:  A  systematic  review  of  meta-analyses,  randomized  controlled  trials, 
                                M.Sc.   and large prospective cohorts was conducted for each protocol element. Small-
              Christiaan Schrag, M.D.   er prospective cohorts and retrospective cohorts were considered only when 
                 Marcio Barreto, M.D.   higher level evidence was unavailable. The available literature was graded by 
2017           Phillip Blondeel, M.D.,  an international panel of experts in breast reconstructive surgery and used to 
                               Ph.D.    form consensus recommendations for each topic. Each recommendation was 
               Jeremy Hamming, M.D.     graded  following  a  consensus  discussion  among  the  expert  panel.  Develop-
                  Joseph Dayan, M.D.    ment of these recommendations was endorsed by the Enhanced Recovery after 
          Olle Ljungqvist, M.D., Ph.D.  Surgery Society.
                 for the ERAS Society   Results:  High-quality  randomized  controlled  trial  data  in  patients  undergoing 
                                        breast  reconstruction  informed  some  of  the  recommendations;  however,  for 
          Calgary, Alberta, and Toronto, Ontario, 
                Canada; Duarte, Calif.; Recife, most  items,  data  from  lower  level  studies  in  the  population  of  interest  were 
            Pernambuco, Brazil; Ghent, Belgium; considered along with extrapolated data from high-quality studies in non–breast 
             New York, N.Y.; and Örebro, Sweden reconstruction populations. Recommendations were developed for a total of 18 
                                        unique enhanced recovery after surgery items and are discussed in the article. 
                                        Key recommendations support use of opioid-sparing perioperative medications, 
                                        minimal preoperative fasting and early feeding, use of anesthetic techniques that 
                                        decrease postoperative nausea and vomiting and pain, use of measures to pre-
                                        vent intraoperative hypothermia, and support of early mobilization after surgery.
                                        Conclusion: Based on the best available evidence for each topic, a consensus 
                                        review of optimal perioperative care for patients undergoing breast reconstruc-
                                        tion is presented. (Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 139: 1056e, 2017.)
                                        CLINICAL QUESTION/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic, V.

                ecovery  can  be  improved  in  breast  sur-   that  have  revolutionized  perioperative  care  in 
                gery.1  Enhanced  recovery  after  surgery     colorectal  surgery,2  thereby  reducing  morbidity 
          Rrepresents  evidenced-based  care  elements         and length of stay, and improving survival.3–5 This 
                                                               guideline (Table 1) was developed by an interna-
            From the Departments of Surgery, Oncology, and Anesthe- tional expert panel of physicians under the guid-
            siology and Pain Medicine, University of Calgary; the Tom ance  of  the  Enhanced  Recovery  after  Surgery 
            Baker Cancer Centre; the Cancer Strategic Clinical Network, 
            Alberta Health Services; the City of Hope National Medical 
            Center; the Department of Surgery, University of Toronto; 
            the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Uni- Disclosure: Dr. Ljungqvist is a founding member of 
            versity Hospital of Ghent; Memorial Sloan Kettering Can- the ERAS Study Group and ERAS Society, an execu-
            cer Center; Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and tive officer of the ERAS Society, and is the founder 
            Health, Örebro University; and private practice.     and a shareholder in EnCARE AB, Sweden 397 
            Received for publication June 13, 2016; accepted October (http://www.encare.se), the provider of the ERAS in-
            17, 2016.                                            teractive audit system. In addition, Dr. Ljungqvist 
            Presented at the 4th World Congress of the Enhanced  was supported by funds from Nyckelfonden, Ore-
             Recovery After Surgery Society, in Lisbon, Portugal, April boro, Sweden. No funding was provided to support 
            27 through 30, 2016.                                 the development of this article and no funding was 
            Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons  received as a result of this article.
            DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000003242

          1056e                                   www.PRSJournal.com
        Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


        Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

        Table 1. ERAS Society Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Recommendations for Perioperative Care in Breast 
        Reconstruction
                                                                                                            Recommendation 
        Item                                         Recommendation                         Evidence Level       Grade


 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 1.  Preadmission  Patients should receive detailed preoperative counseling. Moderate Strong
           information, educa-
           tion, and counseling

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 2.  Preadmission  For daily smokers, 1 mo of abstinence before surgery is Moderate  Strong
           optimization            beneficial. For patients who are obese, weight reduction  (smoking)           Strong
                                   to achieve a BMI ≤30 kg/m2 before surgery is beneficial. High (obesity)       Strong
                                   For alcohol abusers, 1 mo of abstinence before surgery   Low (alcohol)
                                   is beneficial. For appropriate groups, referral should be 
                                   made to resources for these behavior changes.
         3.  Perforator flap     If preoperative perforator mapping is required, CTA is     Moderate             Strong
           planning                recommended.
         4. Perioperative fasting Preoperative fasting should be minimized and patients     Moderate             Strong
                                   should be allowed to drink clear fluids up to 2 hr before 
                                   surgery.
         5. Preoperative         Preoperative maltodextrin-based drinks should be given to  Low                  Strong
           carbohydrate loading    patients 2 hr before surgery.
         6.  Venous              Patients should be assessed for venous thromboembolism risk. Moderate           Strong
           thromboembolism         Unless contraindicated, and balanced by the risk of bleeding, 
           prophylaxis             patients at a higher risk should receive low-molecular-weight 
                                   heparin or unfractionated heparin until ambulatory or 
                                    discharged. Mechanical methods should be added.
         7.  Antimicrobial       Chlorhexidine skin preparation should be performed and     Moderate             Strong
           prophylaxis             intravenous antibiotics covering common skin organisms 
                                   should be given within 1 hr of incision.
         8.  Postoperative nausea Women should receive preoperative and intraoperative      Moderate             Strong
           and vomiting            medications to mitigate postoperative nausea and  
           prophylaxis             vomiting.
         9.  Preoperative and    Women should receive multimodal analgesia to mitigate      Moderate             Strong
           intraoperative          pain.
           analgesia
        10.  Standard anesthetic General anesthesia with TIVA is recommended.               Moderate             Strong
           protocol
        11.  Preventing          Preoperative and intraoperative measures, such as forced  Moderate              Strong
           intraoperative          air, to prevent hypothermia should be instituted. Temper-
           hypothermia             ature monitoring is required to ensure the patient’s body 
                                   temperature is maintained above 36°C.
        12.  Perioperative       Overresuscitation or underresuscitation of fluids should  Moderate              Strong
           intravenous fluid       be avoided and water and electrolyte balance should be 
           management              maintained. Goal-directed therapy is a useful method 
                                   of achieving these goals. Balanced crystalloid solutions, 
                                   rather than saline, is recommended. Vasopressors are 
                                   recommended to support fluid management and do not 
                                   negatively affect free flaps.
        13.  Postoperative       Multimodal postoperative pain management regimens are     High                  Strong
           analgesia               opioid-sparing and should be used.
        14. Early feeding        Patients should be encouraged to take fluids and food     Moderate              Strong
                                   orally as soon as possible, preferably within 24 hr after 
                                   surgery.
        15.  Postoperative flap  Flap monitoring within the first 72 hr should occur fre-  Moderate              Strong
           monitoring              quently. Clinical evaluation is sufficient for monitoring, 
                                   with implantable Doppler devices recommended in cases 
                                   of buried flaps.
        16.  Postoperative wound For incisional closure, conventional sutures are recom-   High (sutures)        Strong
           management              mended. Complex wounds following skin necrosis are      Moderate 
                                   treatable with débridement and negative-pressure wound    (NPWT)
                                   therapy.
        17. Early mobilization   Patients should be mobilized within the first 24 hr after Moderate              Strong
                                   surgery.
        18.  Postdischarge home  Early physiotherapy, supervised exercise programs, and    Moderate              Strong
           support and             other supportive care initiatives should be instituted after 
           physiotherapy           discharge.
        BMI, body mass index; CTA, computed tomographic angiography; TIVA, total intravenous anesthesia; NPWT, negative-pressure wound therapy.


                                                                                                                     1057e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                      Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

      (ERAS)  Society  (www.erassociety.org)  to  formal- complications  by  improving  perioperative  feed-
      ize enhanced recovery after surgery protocols for ing, pain control, and respiratory physiotherapy.10
      breast reconstruction.1,6                          Women  value  presurgical  education  about 
                                                     breast reconstruction,11 yet many feel that they do 
                                                     not receive adequate information,12 leading to dis-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 METhODS
                                                     satisfaction with their reconstruction decisions.13,14 
         An  international  team  of  breast  reconstruc- Patient involvement in co–decision-making about 
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 tion experts teleconferenced monthly from Janu- breast  reconstruction  leads  to  higher  satisfac-
      ary through June of 2015. Guideline items were tion,  independent  of  the  reconstruction  type.15 
      developed  and  the  MEDLINE  and  Cochrane    Sufficient  information  improves  knowledge  and
      databases  were  searched  from  1965  through lessens  decision  regret.16,17  Preconsultation  edu-
      January  of  2015.  Key  words  included  “breast cational  group  interventions  are  one  method  of 
      cancer,”  “mastectomy,”  “breast  neoplasm,”  and reducing decisional conflict.17
      “breast carcinoma”; combined with “reconstruc-
      tion,” “reconstructive surgery,” “implant,” “flap,” 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Patients 
      “expander,”  “acellular  dermal  matrix,”  “mesh,”   should  receive  detailed  preoperative 
      and  “graft.”  The  resulting  citations  were  com- counseling.
      bined  with  additional  topic-specific  key  words. 2. Evidence level: Moderate.
      Reference lists of all eligible articles were hand- 3. Recommendation grade: Strong (low harm).
      searched for additional studies.
         All titles and abstracts were screened to iden-
      tify  potentially  relevant  articles.  Any  discrepan- Preadmission Optimization
                                                         Smoking predisposes women to postmastec-
      cies in the interpretation of articles were resolved                             18–20
      during  working  group  meetings.  Where  avail- tomy  reconstruction  complications,   includ-
                                                     ing  mastectomy  skin  flap  necrosis,  abdominal 
      able, randomized controlled trials and systematic                        21
      reviews in patients undergoing breast reconstruc- flap  necrosis,  and  hernias.   Former  smokers 
      tion were used. Lower level data were considered (i.e., those who quit 3 to 4 weeks preoperatively) 
                                                     and  nonsmokers  have  similar  complication 
      where  no  high-level  data  were  available.  Only 22,23
      the  most  recent,  highest  level  evidence  is  cited. rates.
                                                         Obesity  (i.e.,  body  mass  index  >30 kg/m2) 
      Study quality was assessed using the criteria devel-                                    24–27
      oped by the Centre for Evidence Based Medicine increases flap loss and donor-site morbidity.  
      (Oxford, England).7                            National Surgical Quality Improvement Program 
         Recommendations  were  developed  using  an data  of  2899  women  with  free  flap  reconstruc-
                                                     tions have revealed a strong correlation between 
      evidence-based  consensus  approach.  Using  the 
                                                     obesity  and  surgical-site  infections,  venous 
      results  of  the  systematic  review,  the  panel  pro-
                                                     thromboembolism, and other complications.28,29 
      vided  expert  interpretation  of  the  evidence  and 
                                                     Patients  should  therefore  be  encouraged  to 
      discussed  and  modified  each  recommendation 
                                                     lose  weight  before  surgery.  Muscle-preserving 
      until  no  further  modifications  were  required 
                                                     abdominal  flaps  [i.e.,  deep  inferior  epigastric 
      and  consensus  was  reached.  Recommendations 
                                                     perforator (DIEP) flap] reduce abdominal wall 
      were  graded  as  “weak”  or  “strong”  according  to 
                                                     complications  compared  with  non–muscle-spar-
      the  Grading  of  Recommendations,  Assessment, 
                                                     ing  flaps  [i.e.,  free  or  pedicle  transverse  rectus 
      Development and Evaluation system.8
                                                     abdominis  musculocutaneous  (TRAM)  flap]  in 
                                                     obese patients.27,30
                EVIDENCE BASE AND                        Regarding  diabetes,  National  Surgical  Qual-
                recommendations                      ity Improvement Program data on 29,736 women 
                                                     with breast reconstruction have linked type 2 dia-
      ERAS Items                                     betes mellitus to surgical complications (OR, 1.51) 
         Preadmission Information, Education, and    and type 1 diabetes mellitus to medical (OR, 1.82) 
      Counseling                                     and overall complications (OR, 1.85).31 Poor gly-
         Providing  surgical  and  anesthetic  informa- cemic control is associated with worse outcomes 
      tion  preoperatively  improves  recovery  by  reduc- in primary closure of surgical wounds in high-risk 
      ing  fear  and  anxiety.9  Information  about  the patients.32
      procedure  assists  patients  in  reaching  postop- Heavy  alcohol  consumption  (five  or  more 
      erative milestones and has been shown to reduce drinks on each of 5 or more days in the past 30 days) 

      1058e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


      Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

      is  also  associated  with  poor  outcomes,  particularly 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Preop-
      attributable to surgical-site infections. National Sur- erative  fasting  should  be  minimized  and 
      gical  Quality  Improvement  Program  data  on  9315 patients  should  be  allowed  to  drink  clear 
      patients undergoing immediate reconstruction have    fluids up to 2 hours before surgery.
      revealed heavy alcohol consumption as an indepen- 2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 dent risk factor for surgical-site infections.33 olated data).
                                                        3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  For  daily 
           smokers,  1  month  of  abstinence  before    Preoperative Carbohydrate Loading
           surgery  is  beneficial.  For  patients  who  are Taken 2  hours  before  surgery,  maltodextrin-
           obese, weight reduction to achieve a body based  drinks  (400 ml)  specifically  designed  and 
                                                 2
           mass index less than or equal to 30 kg/m  tested  for  preoperative  use  have  positive  meta-
           before  surgery  is  beneficial.  For  alcohol bolic effects, such as increasing insulin sensitivity 
           abusers, 1 month of abstinence before sur- and reducing preoperative thirst and anxiety.42–44 
           gery  is  beneficial.  For  appropriate  groups, Carbohydrate  loading  reduces  the  catabolic 
           referral  should  be  made  to  resources  for effects of surgery, including losses of nitrogen and 
           these behavior changes.                   protein, lean body mass, and muscle strength,45–48 
         2. Evidence level: Moderate for smoking; high which has translated into shorter hospital stays.49 
           for obesity; low for alcohol.             In  patients  with  well-controlled  type  2  diabetes, 
         3. Recommendation  grade:  Strong  for  all a carbohydrate drink given up to 3 hours before 
           (high benefit, low harm).                 surgery  alongside  their  normal  medication  does 
                                                     not  appear  to  delay  gastric  emptying  and  will 
         Perforator Flap Planning                    allow glucose concentrations the additional time 
                                                     required (i.e., 180 minutes versus 120 minutes in 
         Meta-analysis  has  shown  the  benefit  of  com-                             50
      puted  tomographic  angiography  over  Doppler healthy subjects) to return to baseline.
      ultrasonography  in  mapping  the  dominant  DIEP 
                                                        1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Preopera-
      perforators;  benefits  include  reduced  flap com-
                                                           tive  maltodextrin-based  drinks  should  be 
      plications,  donor-site  morbidity,  and  operative 
                                                           given to patients 2 hours before surgery.
      times.34  Risks  include  potential  contrast  allergy, 
                                            35          2. Evidence level: Low (based on extrapolated 
      nephrotoxicity, and exposure to radiation.  Mod-     data).
      ern computed tomographic angiography scanning 
                                            36          3. Recommendation grade: Strong (low risk of 
      protocols have reduced radiation exposure.  Mag-     harm) in the general patient population.
      netic resonance angiography avoids radiation, but 
      image quality remains a challenge that is improv-
      ing with a variety of technical refinements.37–39  Prophylaxis against Venous 
                                                     Thromboembolism
         1. Summary  and  recommendation:  If  preop-    National  Surgical  Quality  Improvement  Pro-
           erative  perforator  mapping  is  required, gram  data  on  68,285  patients  have  shown  that 
           computed  tomographic  angiography  is    venous  thromboembolism  in  reconstruction 
           recommended.                              patients approaches twice that of lumpectomy or 
         2. Evidence level: Moderate.                mastectomy alone (0.41 percent versus 0.13 per-
                                                                                      28
         3. Recommendation grade: Strong.            cent  and  0.29  percent; p  <  0.0001).   Retrospec-
                                                     tive  reviews  have  reported  rates  as  high  as  3.4 
                                                     percent.51,52  Nationwide  Inpatient  Sample  data 
         Preoperative Fasting                        on 35,883 patients undergoing autologous recon-
         A  Cochrane  review  of  22  randomized  con- struction  have  revealed  a  lower  rate  of  venous 
      trolled trials has shown that drinking clear fluids 2 thromboembolism  (0.13  percent);  however,  the 
      hours preoperatively is safe and does not increase rate  of  venous  thromboembolism  was  highest 
      the  risk  of  regurgitation  or  aspiration.40  Exist- for  TRAM  flap  reconstruction  at  0.26  percent.52 
      ing  ERAS  guidelines  recommend  a  6-hour  fast Immediate  breast  reconstruction  is  an  indepen-
      for solid foods and a 2-hour fast for clear liquids dent risk factor for venous thromboembolism.53
      before  general  anesthesia.41  Recommendations    Patients undergoing mastectomy and immedi-
      have not been applied to patients at increased risk ate reconstruction meet the criteria for “higher” 
      of delayed gastric emptying.                   risk  of  venous  thromboembolism  and  may  be 

                                                                                           1059e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                      Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

      considered  “highest”  risk  if  they  are  obese  or a  meta-analysis  of  observational  studies  and  not 
      elderly,  according  to  the  American  Society  of randomized controlled trials. Aside from this meta-
      Plastic Surgeons Executive Committee–approved  analysis, there are no other published data to inform 
      Caprini  Risk  Assessment  Module.54,55  For  this duration of antibiotic use, and further research is 
      patient  population,  pharmacologic  anticoagula- needed.  Prolonged  use  of  antibiotics  beyond  24 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 tion  with  or  without  mechanical  methods  (i.e., hours has not been proved beneficial.73–75
      intermittent  pneumatic  compression)  is  recom-  Chlorhexidine-based  antiseptics  immedi-
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 mended.55,56  Prophylaxis  should  begin  before ately  before  surgery  decrease  surgical-site  infec-
      surgery  and  continue  for  at  least  7  to  10  days.57 tions.76,77  In  implant  reconstruction,  bacterial 
      Extended prophylaxis up to 4 weeks reduces the burden  can  be  reduced  through  antibiotic  irri-
      risk  of  radiologically  confirmed  venous  throm- gation of the breast pocket, which may decrease 
      boembolism  following  major  abdominopelvic   capsular  contracture  but  has  not  been  proven 
      surgery.58 A prospective cohort and two large ret- to  decrease  surgical-site  infections.78  Methicil-
      rospective  cohorts  on  low-molecular-weight  hep- lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  infections  are 
      arin  did  not  report  increased  bleeding  risk58–60; increasing;  however,  a  Cochrane  review  did  not 
      however, in breast surgery specifically, some stud- support a switch to glycopeptide antibiotics (i.e., 
      ies have shown that low-molecular-weight heparin vancomycin).69
      has  a  higher  bleeding  risk  than  unfractionated 
      heparin.61,62                                     1. Summary and recommendation: Chlorhexi-
                                                           dine skin preparation and intravenous anti-
         1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Patients        biotics  covering  common  skin  organisms 
           should be assessed for venous thromboem-        should be given within 1 hour of incision.
           bolism  risk.  Unless  contraindicated,  and 2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap-
           balanced by the risk of bleeding, patients at   olated data).
           a higher risk should receive low-molecular-  3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
           weight  heparin  or  unfractionated  heparin 
           until  they  are  ambulatory  or  discharged. Preoperative and Intraoperative Prophylaxis 
           Mechanical methods should be added.       against Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
         2. Evidence level: Moderate.                    A  meta-analysis  demonstrated  the  superior-
         3. Recommendation grade: Strong.            ity of 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 receptor antagonists 
                                                     over  placebo  in  reducing  postoperative  nausea 
                                                                                 79
         Antimicrobial Prophylaxis                   and vomiting in breast surgery.  Steroids reduce 
         Infection  rates  following  mastectomy  are postoperative nausea and vomiting and pain, and 
      higher than those expected for clean surgery (i.e., a  combination  of  5-hydroxytryptamine-3  antago-
                                                                                              80–82
      3 to 15 percent versus 2 percent).63,64 The risk of nists and steroids is superior to either alone.  
      infection is further increased with the addition of Neurokinin-1  receptor  antagonists  provide  even 
      a prosthesis or a flap.65–67 National Surgical Quality further  reduction  in  postoperative  nausea  and 
                                                     vomiting  compared  with  5-hydroxytryptamine-3, 
      Improvement Program data on 2899 patients with                               83–88
      flaps  and  12,163  patients  with  tissue  expanders but must be given preoperatively.
      have revealed that patient factors such as hyper-
      tension, body mass index, and smoking increase    1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Women 
      infection risk after breast reconstruction.29,68     should  receive  preoperative  and  intraop-
         Prophylactic  antibiotics  reduce  surgical-site  erative multimodal medications to mitigate 
      infections.69  Antibiotics  against  common  skin    postoperative nausea and vomiting.
      organisms (i.e., cephalosporins) should be admin- 2. Evidence level: Moderate.
      istered 1 hour before incision.70,71 The majority of 3. Recommendation grade: Strong (high ben-
      data support the perioperative use of prophylactic   efit, low harm).
      antibiotics.64,65,70–72  Despite  the  common  practice 
      to  use  postoperative  antibiotics  until  drains  are Preoperative and Intraoperative Analgesia
      removed,  data  from  a  well-conducted  systematic Gabapentin89–91 reduces postoperative analgesic 
      review have shown that more than 24 hours of anti- requirements and pain in women undergoing mas-
      biotics appears to be associated with higher rates tectomy. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs offer 
      of surgical-site infections in acellular dermal matrix effective  analgesia  given  preoperatively  or  intraop-
      reconstructions.65 It should be noted that this was eratively, and decrease chronic breast pain without 

      1060e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


      Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

      increasing bleeding complications.92,93 Perioperative Preventing Intraoperative hypothermia
      cyclooxygenase-2  inhibitors  have  a  similar  benefi- Maintaining  a  core  body  temperature  over 
      cial effect.94 Bupivacaine infiltration in the area of 36°C reduces multiple complications.111 The Sur-
      planned surgical incision for mastectomy decreases gical Care Improvement Project linked hypother-
      pain intensity and opiate demand after surgery.95 mia  with  impaired  wound  healing,  prolonged 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Adenosine,96  systemic  magnesium,97  venla- hospitalization,  and  three-fold  higher  wound 
      faxine,98  and  clonidine99  are  effective  analgesics infection rates.112 A systematic review in  multiple 
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 given preoperatively. Preoperative ketamine does surgery  types  showed  that  warming  decreases 
      not moderate postoperative pain.100 The majority wound  infection.1  Attention  to  active  thermal 
      of data were extrapolated from breast surgery, but therapy is required when using intermittent pneu-
      for longer duration operations such as free tissue matic  compression  devices,  which  move  cooled 
      transfer reconstructions, the preoperative advan- extremity  blood  to  the  core.113  Preoperative 
      tage may be diminished; thus, these medications patient-warming  strategies  augment  intraopera-
      may be best given intraoperatively.            tive  warming  strategies.114,115  Simply  prewarming 
                                                     the operating room itself is not enough.116
         1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Women         Forced-air  warming  has  an  excellent  safety 
           should receive multimodal analgesia to mit- profile and efficacy in a systematic review of mul-
           igate pain.                               tiple  randomized  controlled  trials.117  Forced  air 
         2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap- is  superior  to  resistive  underbody  warming.118,119 
           olated data).                             Circulating  water  garments,120  thermal  mat-
         3. Recommendation grade: Strong (high ben-  tresses,121–123  and  circulating-water  leg  wraps124 
           efit, low harm).                          offer some increase in temperature; however, the 
                                                     safety, low cost, and ease of use of forced-air warm-
                                                     ing supplant other systems.
         Standard Anesthetic Protocol
                                                         Warmed  intravenous  fluid  reduces  hypo-
         Retrospective data have suggested that the use 
                                                     thermia  in  short  surgical  procedures,125  but  in 
      of  regional  anesthesia,  compared  with  general 
                                                     orthopedic  surgery,  warming  irrigation  fluid  is 
      anesthesia,  lowers  the  recurrence  of  subsequent 
                                                     insufficient  to  prevent  hypothermia.126  In  liver 
      breast cancer,101 potentially through natural killer 
                                                     transplantation,  humidification  of  inspired  gas 
      T  cells.102  Similar  early  findings  in  prostate  and 
                                                     warms  the  patient  effectively.127  Amino  acid  and 
      colorectal cancer have led to a large prospective, 
                                                     magnesium infusions reduce shivering.128,129
      multicenter,  randomized,  controlled  trial  that  is 
      currently  investigating  this  hypothesis  for  breast 
                                                        1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Preopera-
      cancer patients.103–105 The findings from this study, 
                                                           tive  and  intraoperative  measures,  such  as 
      when completed, may have a major impact on the 
                                                           forced  air, to  prevent  hypothermia  should 
      choice of anesthetic technique.
                                                           be  instituted.  Temperature  monitoring  is 
         There  are  three  common  modalities  for 
                                                           required to ensure the patient’s body tem-
      maintenance of anesthesia during breast surgery, 
                                                           perature is maintained above 36°C.
      including  general  anesthesia  with  total  intrave-
                                                        2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap-
      nous  anesthesia,  general  anesthesia  with  a  vola-
                                                           olated data).
      tile anesthetic, and regional anesthesia. Regional 
                                                        3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
      anesthesia decreases postoperative narcotic use106–
      108 but does not decrease pain, nausea, sedation, 
      time  to  ambulation,  or  hospital  stay  duration.107 Perioperative Intravenous Fluid Management
      General  anesthesia  is  the  most  frequently  used A  randomized  controlled  trial  demonstrated 
      modality  of  anesthesia  for  breast  surgery;  gen- that a restricted IV fluid regimen decreases com-
      eral  anesthesia  under  total  intravenous  anesthe- plications in abdominal surgery by 59 percent.130 
      sia decreases postoperative nausea and vomiting Optimizing  fluid  balance  begins  by  taking  clear 
      compared with a volatile anesthetic.109,110    fluids  orally  up  to  2  hours  preoperatively. Goal-
                                                     directed  therapy  (i.e.,  intensive  monitoring  and 
         1. Summary  and  recommendation:  General   aggressive management of perioperative hemody-
           anesthesia with total intravenous anesthesia namics) improves length of stay and complication 
           is recommended.                           rates131–134; however, a recent meta-analysis showed 
         2. Evidence level: Moderate.                that the benefit of goal-directed therapy was muted 
         3. Recommendation grade: Strong.            in patients managed in an enhanced recovery after 

                                                                                           1061e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                      Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

      surgery setting.135 Measurement of venous oxygen   Regional  or  local  blocks  minimize  pain 
      saturation has utility in major surgery, but its use and  sedation.  Continuous  bupivacaine  infu-
      in breast surgery has not been established.136 Bal- sion  catheters  reduce  opioid  requirements  in 
      anced  crystalloid  solutions  are  superior  to  0.9% several  studies.164–166  Randomized  controlled 
      saline for electrolyte balance.137,138         trial  evidence  shows  that  transversus  abdomi-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Overresuscitation contributes to cardiopulmo- nis plane blocks decrease abdominal donor-site 
      nary  events,  wound  infection,  poor  wound  heal- pain  in  flap  patients.106,167  A  single  injection  of 
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 ing, and increased length of hospital stay.139–141 It liposomal  bupivacaine  lasts  for  several  days, 
      is especially harmful in microvascular reconstruc- potentially avoiding the need for catheter-based 
      tion.142–145  Underresuscitation  increases  postop- infusions.168  Randomized  controlled  trial  data 
      erative microvascular thrombosis.137 Vasopressors on pulse electromagnetic field therapy in TRAM 
      to maintain blood pressure have been historically flap patients have shown decreases in pain and 
      avoided  in  flap  patients,  but  have  been  found narcotic use.169
      to  be  safe  in  normovolemic  patients.146–149  Dex-
      tran-40,  traditionally  used  to  reduce  the  risk  of 1. Summary and recommendation: Multimodal 
      microvascular thrombosis, lacks efficacy and has a   postoperative  pain  management  regimens 
      high complication rate.150                           are opioid-sparing and should be used.
                                                        2. Evidence level: High.
         1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Overre-      3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
           suscitation  or  underresuscitation  of  fluids 
           should  be  avoided,  and  water  and  elec-  Early Feeding
           trolyte  balance  should  be  maintained.     An early oral or enteral diet within 24 hours 
           Goal-directed  therapy  is  a  useful  method of  surgery  is  safe  and  associated  with  improved 
           to  achieve  these  goals.  Balanced  crystal- wound  healing,  reduced  infection,  and  reduced 
           loid  solutions  rather  than  saline  is  recom- hospital stay.170 The benefits of early refeeding171 
           mended.  Vasopressors  are  recommended   need  to  be  weighed  against  the  rare  risk  of  a 
           to  support  fluid  management  and  do  not potential  urgent  return  to  the  operating  room, 
           negatively affect free flaps.             whereby a fed patient is at risk for aspiration. The 
         2. Evidence level: Moderate for all (based on urgent return arises in 2 to 5 percent of patients 
           extrapolated data).                       who develop a microvascular thrombosis in their 
         3. Recommendation grade: Strong.            free flap breast reconstruction.172–174 Modern anes-
                                                     thetic techniques should mitigate the risk of aspi-
                                                                                    175
         Postoperative Analgesia                     ration in this uncommon scenario.
         Postoperative  pain  control  needs  to  be  ade-
      quate to facilitate early mobilization. Reducing the 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Patients 
      contribution  of  opioids  to  the  analgesic  regimen should  be  encouraged  to  take  fluids  and 
      reduces  postoperative  nausea  and  vomiting  and   food  orally  as  soon  as  possible,  preferably 
      constipation,  effectively  facilitating  early  mobiliza- within 24 hours after surgery.
      tion. A meta-analysis of intravenous acetaminophen 2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap-
      (paracetamol) has shown that it reduces pain in only olated data).
      37 percent of patients.151 Although acetaminophen 3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
      alone is less effective than nonsteroidal antiinflam-
      matory drugs,152 Cochrane data from three random-  Postoperative Flap Monitoring
      ized  controlled  trials  have  demonstrated  that  the Microvascular thrombosis occurs in the anas-
      combination is more effective than either alone.153 tomosis of the free flap in 2 to 5 percent of cases 
         Nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory  drugs  reduce and usually occurs within the first 72 hours.172–174 
      the  need  for  narcotics  with  minimal  surgical-site Most commonly (60 to 74 percent), a microvas-
      bleeding  risk  in  multiple  randomized  controlled cular  thrombosis  will  occur  venously.173,176  Sal-
      trials.154–156 Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors reduce the vage  of  a  compromised  free  flap  is  improved 
      potential for gastrointestinal tract bleeding and sur- with earlier exploration and return of flow176,177; 
      gical-site bleeding157–159 but can increase the risk of therefore, routine frequent monitoring, includ-
      stroke or myocardial infarction in patients with isch- ing clinical observation (i.e., color, temperature, 
      emic heart disease.160 Preoperative or postoperative and capillary refill) and use of devices, is highly 
      gabapentin reduces narcotic requirements.161–163 warranted.

      1062e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


      Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

         Hand-held  Doppler  is  an  extension  of  clinical negative-pressure  wound  therapy  in  conjunction 
      observation,  as  it  is  noninvasive  and  inexpensive with débridement healed completely.197
      and has widespread use.178 Frequent monitoring is 
      required in the first 72 hours and a reasonable mon- 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  For  inci-
      itoring  protocol  may  include  hourly  monitoring  sional  closure,  conventional  sutures  are 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 for the first 24 hours, every 2 hours for the next 24 recommended. Complex wounds following 
      hours, then every 3 to 4 hours for the next 24 hours. skin  necrosis  are  treatable  with  débride-
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 Implantable  Doppler  monitors  have  excel- ment and negative-pressure wound therapy.
      lent sensitivity in detecting flap compromise, but 2. Evidence level: High for sutures; moderate 
      can detach and thus carry a higher false-positive    for negative-pressure wound therapy.
      rate than clinical observation.179 Studies compar- 3. Recommendation grade: Strong.
      ing clinical observation with or without implant-
      able  Doppler  monitors,  are  equivocal  in  terms 
                             181,182                     Early Mobilization
      of  improved  flap  salvage.   For  buried  flaps, Early  in-hospital  mobilization  improves  mus-
      implantable  Doppler  monitoring  offers  the  only       198
                       178                           cle strength  and reduces pulmonary embolism, 
      objective measure.  Other methods of monitor-  pneumonia,  and  decubitus  ulcers.  Early  mobi-
      ing flaps include a venous coupler with an embed- lization  decreases  length  of  hospitalization  and 
      ded  implantable  Doppler  device,  laser  Doppler improves psychological well-being.199–205 Conversely, 
      monitoring,  infrared  spectroscopy,  tissue  oxim- prolonged bed rest has been shown to reduce work 
                          183–185
      etry, and microdialysis.                       capacity.206  Prolonged  inactivity  combined  with  a 
                                                     catabolic  state  (i.e.,  postoperative  stress)  exacer-
         1. Summary and recommendation: Flap moni-   bates strength and lean muscle loss.207
           toring within the first 72 hours should occur 
           frequently.  Clinical  evaluation  is  sufficient 1. Summary  and  recommendation:  Patients 
           for  monitoring,  with  implantable  Doppler    should  be  mobilized  within  the  first  24 
           monitoring recommended in cases of bur-         hours after surgery.
           ied flaps.                                   2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap-
         2. Evidence level: Moderate.                      olated data).
         3. Recommendation    grade:  Strong  (low      3. Recommendation grade: Strong (low risk).
           harm).
                                                         Postdischarge home Support and 
         Postoperative Wound Management              Physiotherapy
         Breast  and  abdominal  incisions  following    Early  physical  rehabilitation  improves  physi-
      breast  reconstruction  are  generally  closed  with cal and emotional recovery after mastectomy and 
      layered intradermal absorbable sutures.186 Antimi- axillary  dissection.208,209  Postoperative  physical 
      crobial-coated versus plain sutures do not show a rehabilitation programs in breast cancer patients 
      significant reduction in surgical-site infections in improve mobility, reduce pain, and improve qual-
      randomized controlled trials.187,188 Other random- ity of life.210 Randomized controlled trial data on 
      ized controlled trials evaluating the skin adhesive the effect of early supervised exercise have dem-
      octyl-2-cyanoacrylate in breast surgery show patient onstrated that exercise leads to quicker recovery, 
      preference for the adhesive but no objective differ- earlier  mobility,  and  enhanced  patient  comfort, 
      ence in cosmesis or complications.189–192 A surgical but fails to improve lymphedema.208,211
      skin closure film has been found to be faster than Qualitative  studies  show  that  visiting  nurses 
      sutures,  but  with  no  difference  in  complication play an important role in providing physical care 
      rates.193 An ongoing randomized controlled trial is and  delivering  education  and  psychosocial  sup-
      evaluating the effect of dressing wear time (1 day port  following  TRAM  flap  reconstruction.212,213 
      versus 6 days) on surgical-site infections.194 Postdischarge telephone and mobile application 
         Complex wounds associated with mastectomy   support are “virtual” adjuncts to in-home nursing 
      flap,  DIEP  flap,  or  abdominal  skin  necrosis are visits and outpatient visits.210,214
      recognized  complications  of  breast  reconstruc-
      tion.195,196 Negative-pressure wound therapy is an 1. Summary and recommendation: Early phys-
      effective  aid  in  wound  management  after  sur-   iotherapy,  supervised  exercise  programs, 
      gical  débridement,  with  a  systematic  review  of and other supportive care initiatives should 
      breast wounds showing that 97 percent receiving      be instituted after discharge.

                                                                                           1063e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                      Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

         2. Evidence level: Moderate (based on extrap- is also important and should be assessed through 
           olated data).                             validated outcome measures, such as the Quality 
         3. Recommendation    grade:  Strong  (low   of Recovery-15 scale.222
           harm).                                        These recommendations will require revision 
                                                     as new evidence emerges. Each recommendation 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 alone is unlikely to change the recovery process, 
                                                     but bundled together and applied with good sense 
hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 CONCLUSIONS
                                                     and care, these recommendations may transform 
         The literature surrounding breast reconstruc- the recovery experience for patients and for the 
      tion has evolved from establishing oncologic safety health care system.218
      and optimal timing, refining surgical techniques, 
      and  improving  cosmesis,  to  the  point  where  we               Claire Temple-Oberle, M.D., M.Sc.
      now use patient-reported outcome measures215,216                             1331 29 Street NW
                                                                       Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N2, Canada 
      to  evaluate  what  matters  to  patients.  Patient-                  claire.temple-oberle@ahs.ca
      reported  outcome  measures  show  that  despite 
      our  optimization  of  procedures,  recovery  is  sub-
                                      15
      optimal across reconstruction types.                           REFERENCES
         An  enhanced  recovery  experience  has  been  1. Arsalani-Zadeh  R,  ElFadl  D,  Yassin  N,  MacFie  J.  Evidence-
      realized in major abdominal surgery through the   based  review  of  enhancing  postoperative  recovery  after 
      introduction of ERAS guidelines.217,218 Most of the breast surgery. Br J Surg. 2011;98:181–196.
      recommendations in the colorectal guideline are  2. Lassen K, Soop M, Nygren J, et al.; Enhanced Recovery After 
      directly relevant and can be extrapolated to breast Surgery (ERAS) Group. Consensus review of optimal peri-
                                                        operative  care  in  colorectal  surgery:  Enhanced  Recovery 
      reconstruction. Practitioners now avoid long fast- After Surgery (ERAS) Group recommendations. Arch Surg. 
      ing  periods,  attend  to  patient  temperature,  and 2009;144:961–969.
      use  multimodal  pain  and  postoperative  nausea  3. Greco  M,  Capretti  G,  Beretta  L,  Gemma  M,  Pecorelli  N, 
      and vomiting prevention strategies.219,220        Braga M. Enhanced recovery program in colorectal surgery: 
         These  18  recommendations  represent  a  syn- A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. World J Surg. 
                                                        2014;38:1531–1541.
      thesis of the current body of literature by an inter-  4. Gustafsson UO, Hausel J, Thorell A, Ljungqvist O, Soop M, 
      national  group  of  experts  and  can  be  applied Nygren  J;  Enhanced  Recovery  After  Surgery  Study  Group. 
      to  most  patients,  with  the  goal  of  providing  a Adherence  to  the  enhanced  recovery  after  surgery  proto-
      rapid  recovery  with  low  complication  rates  and col and outcomes after colorectal cancer surgery. Arch Surg. 
      decreased care time. As with any practice guide-  2011;146:571–577.
                                                      5. Gustafsson  UO,  Oppelstrup  H,  Thorell  A,  Nygren  J, 
      line, clinicians should use independent judgment  Ljungqvist A. Adherence to the ERAS-protocol is associated 
      of  an  individual  patient’s  clinical  circumstances with 5-year survival after colorectal cancer surgery: A retro-
      to  direct  care.  This  consensus  guideline  is  not spective cohort study. World J Surg. 2016;40:1741–1747.
      intended to be leveraged as a rationale for fund-  6. Batdorf NJ, Lemaine V, Lovely JK, et al. Enhanced recovery 
      ing bodies to restrict payment for care based on  after surgery in microvascular breast reconstruction. J Plast 
                                                        Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2015;68:395–402.
      hospital length of stay. Rather, patient safety must  7. Centre  for  Evidence-Based  Medicine.  Oxford  Centre  for 
      be  considered  first  and  these  practices  should Evidence-based  Medicine:  Levels  of  Evidence  (March  2009). 
      be implemented in a measured, thoughtful, and     Available  at:  http://www.cebm.net/oxford-centre-evidence-
      studied manner.                                   based-medicine-levels-evidence-march-2009/. Accessed January 
         To effectively change practice, guidelines must 2, 2015.
                                                      8. Guyatt  GH,  Oxman  AD,  Kunz  R,  et  al.;  GRADE  Working 
      be supported by strong data. Many of these recom- Group.  Going  from  evidence  to  recommendations. BMJ 
      mendations can be strengthened with data from     2008;336:1049–1051.
      patients undergoing breast reconstruction in the  9. Kiecolt-Glaser  JK,  Page  GG,  Marucha  PT,  MacCallum  RC, 
      setting of an ERAS protocol. For women under-     Glaser  R.  Psychological  influences  on  surgical  recovery: 
      going  implant-based  breast  reconstruction,  the Perspectives  from  psychoneuroimmunology. Am Psychol. 
                                                        1998;53:1209–1218.
      recently demonstrated benefits of an ERAS proto-  10. Halaszynski TM, Juda R, Silverman DG. Optimizing postop-
      col include reduced length of stay and better qual- erative outcomes with efficient preoperative assessment and 
      ity of recovery, with no differences in complication management. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(Suppl):S76–S86.
      rates or emergency room visits.221 Minimizing care  11. Wolf L. The information needs of women who have under-
      time and complications is the goal for this group gone breast reconstruction: Part II. Information giving and 
                                                        content of information. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2004;8:315–324.
      of  women  and  can  be  measured  through  audit  12. Lam  A,  Secord  S,  Butler  K,  et  al.  A  breast  reconstruction 
      of  infection  rates,  deep  venous  thrombosis,  and needs assessment: How does self-efficacy affect information 
      other outcomes; however, the recovery experience  access and preferences? Can J Plast Surg. 2012;20:37–42.

      1064e
    Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


        Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

         13. Zhong  T, Hu  J,  Bagher  S,  et  al.  Decision  regret  following  30. Mennie  JC,  Mohanna  PN,  O’Donoghue  JM,  Rainsbury  R, 
           breast  reconstruction:  The  role  of  self-efficacy  and  satis- Cromwell  DA.  Donor-site  hernia  repair  in  abdominal  flap 
           faction  with  information  in  the  preoperative  period. Plast breast  reconstruction:  A  population-based  cohort  study  of 
           Reconstr Surg. 2013;132:724e–734e.                           7,929 patients. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;136:1–9.
         14. Ho AL, Klassen AF, Cano S, Scott AM, Pusic AL. Optimizing  31. Qin  C,  Vaca  E,  Lovecchio  F,  Ver  Halen  JP,  Hansen  NM, 
           patient-centered care in breast reconstruction: The impor-   Kim  JY.  Differential  impact  of  non-insulin-dependent  dia-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 tance  of  preoperative  information  and  patient-physician betes  mellitus  and  insulin-dependent  diabetes  mellitus 
           communication. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132:212e–220e.      on  breast  reconstruction  outcomes. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025  15. Temple-Oberle C, Ayeni O, Webb C, Bettger-Hahn M, Ayeni 2014;146:429–438.
           O,  Mychailyshyn  N.  Shared  decision-making:  Applying  a  32. Endara  M,  Masden  D,  Goldstein  J,  Gondek  S,  Steinberg  J, 
           person-centered approach to tailored breast reconstruction   Attinger  C.  The  role  of  chronic  and  perioperative  glucose 
           information  provides  high  satisfaction  across  a  variety  of management in high-risk surgical closures: A case for tighter 
           breast reconstruction options. J Surg Oncol. 2014;110:796–800. glycemic control. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132:996–1004.
         16. Heller L, Parker PA, Youssef A, Miller MJ. Interactive digital  33. Nguyen TJ, Costa MA, Vidar EN, et al. Effect of immediate 
           education  aid  in  breast  reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. reconstruction  on  postmastectomy  surgical  site  infection. 
           2008;122:717–724.                                            Ann Surg. 2012;256:326–333.
         17. Causarano  N,  Platt  J,  Baxter  NN,  et  al.  Pre-consultation  34. Ohkuma  R,  Mohan  R,  Baltodano  PA,  et  al.  Abdominally 
           educational  group  intervention  to  improve  shared  deci- based free flap planning in breast reconstruction with com-
           sion-making  for  postmastectomy  breast  reconstruction:    puted  tomographic  angiography:  Systematic  review  and 
           A  pilot  randomized  controlled  trial. Support Care Cancer meta-analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133:483–494.
           2015;23:1365–1375.                                        35. Symonette CJ, Gan BS. Computed tomography-based preop-
         18. Chang DW, Reece GP, Wang B, et al. Effect of smoking on    erative vascular imaging in autologous breast reconstruction: 
           complications in patients undergoing free TRAM flap breast   A Canadian perspective. Can J Plast Surg. 2013;21:11–14.
           reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105:2374–2380.  36. Phillips  TJ,  Stella  DL,  Rozen  WM,  Ashton  M,  Taylor  GI. 
         19. Padubidri AN, Yetman R, Browne E, et al. Complications of  Abdominal  wall  CT  angiography:  A  detailed  account  of  a 
           postmastectomy breast reconstructions in smokers, ex-smok-   newly established preoperative imaging technique. Radiology 
           ers, and nonsmokers. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;107:342–349;  2008;249:32–44.
           discussion 350.                                           37. Kagen AC, Hossain R, Dayan E, et al. Modern perforator flap 
                                                                        imaging  with  high-resolution  blood  pool  MR  angiography. 
         20. Sorensen LT, Karlsmark T, Gottrup F. Abstinence from smok-
                                                                        Radiographics 2015;35:901–915.
           ing reduces incisional wound infection: A randomized con-
                                                                     38. Scott JR, Liu D, Said H, Neligan PC, Mathes DW. Computed 
           trolled trial. Ann Surg. 2003;238:1–5.
                                                                        tomographic  angiography  in  planning  abdomen-based 
         21. Fischer JP, Wes AM, Tuggle CT, Serletti JM, Wu LC. Risk anal-
                                                                        microsurgical breast reconstruction: A comparison with color 
           ysis and stratification of surgical morbidity after immediate 
                                                                        duplex ultrasound. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;125:446–453.
           breast reconstruction. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217:780–787.
                                                                     39. Newman  TM,  Vasile  J,  Levine  JL,  et  al.  Perforator  flap 
         22. Møller AM, Villebro N, Pedersen T, Tønnesen H. Effect of 
                                                                        magnetic  resonance  angiography  for  reconstructive  breast 
           preoperative smoking intervention on postoperative compli-
                                                                        surgery:  A  review  of  25  deep  inferior  epigastric  and  glu-
           cations: A randomised clinical trial. Lancet 2002;359:114–117.
                                                                        teal  perforator  artery  flap  patients. J Magn Reson Imaging 
         23. Thomsen T, Villebro N, Møller AM. Interventions for pre-
                                                                        2010;31:1176–1184.
           operative  smoking  cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  40. Brady M, Kinn S, Stuart P. Preoperative fasting for adults to 
           2010;7:CD002294.                                             prevent  perioperative  complications. Cochrane Database Syst 
         24. Fischer  JP,  Nelson  JA,  Kovach  SJ,  Serletti  JM,  Wu  LC, Rev. 2003;4:CD004423.
           Kanchwala S. Impact of obesity on outcomes in breast recon-  41. Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G, et al. Enhanced Recovery 
           struction: Analysis of 15,937 patients from the ACS-NSQIP    After  Surgery  (ERAS)  for  gastrointestinal  surgery,  part 
           datasets. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217:656–664.                  2:  Consensus  statement  for  anaesthesia  practice. Acta 
         25. Schaverien MV, Mcculley SJ. Effect of obesity on outcomes  Anaesthesiol Scand. 2016;60:289–334.
           of  free  autologous  breast  reconstruction:  A  meta-analysis.  42. Bilku DK, Dennison AR, Hall TC, Metcalfe MS, Garcea G. 
           Microsurgery 2014;34:484–497.                                Role  of  preoperative  carbohydrate  loading:  A  systematic 
         26. Fischer JP, Nelson JA, Sieber B, et al. Free tissue transfer in review. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2014;96:15–22.
           the obese patient: An outcome and cost analysis in 1258 con-  43. Hausel J, Nygren J, Lagerkranser M, et al. A carbohydrate-
           secutive  abdominally  based  reconstructions. Plast Reconstr rich drink reduces preoperative discomfort in elective sur-
           Surg. 2013;131:681e–692e.                                    gery patients. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:1344–1350.
         27. Lee KT, Mun GH. Effects of obesity on postoperative compli-  44. Nygren J, Soop M, Thorell A, Efendic S, Nair KS, Ljungqvist 
           cations after breast reconstruction using free muscle-sparing O.  Preoperative  oral  carbohydrate  administration  reduces 
           transverse  rectus  abdominis  myocutaneous,  deep  inferior postoperative insulin resistance. Clin Nutr. 1998;17:65–71.
           epigastric  perforator,  and  superficial  inferior  epigastric  45. Crowe PJ, Dennison A, Royle GT. The effect of pre-operative 
           artery flap: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Plast glucose loading on postoperative nitrogen metabolism. Br J 
           Surg. 2016;76:576–584.                                       Surg. 1984;71:635–637.
         28. Nwaogu  I,  Yan  Y,  Margenthaler  JA,  Myckatyn  TM.  Venous  46. Yuill KA, Richardson RA, Davidson HI, Garden OJ, Parks RW. 
           thromboembolism  after  breast  reconstruction  in  patients The administration of an oral carbohydrate-containing fluid 
           undergoing  breast  surgery:  An  American  College  of      prior  to  major  elective  upper-gastrointestinal  surgery  pre-
           Surgeons NSQIP analysis. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220:886–893.   serves  skeletal  muscle  mass  postoperatively:  A  randomised 
         29. Chung  CU,  Wink  JD,  Nelson  JA,  Fischer  JP,  Serletti  JM, clinical trial. Clin Nutr. 2005;24:32–37.
           Kanchwala SK. Surgical site infections after free flap breast  47. Henriksen  MG,  Hessov  I,  Dela  F,  Hansen  HV,  Haraldsted 
           reconstruction: An analysis of 2,899 patients from the ACS-  V, Rodt SA. Effects of preoperative oral carbohydrates and 
           NSQIP datasets. J Reconstr Microsurg. 2015;31:434–441.       peptides on postoperative endocrine response, mobilization, 

                                                                                                                     1065e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                                     Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

           nutrition  and  muscle  function  in  abdominal  surgery. Acta  66. Sajid MS, Hutson K, Akhter N, Kalra L, Rapisarda IF, Bonomi 
           Anaesthesiol Scand. 2003;47:191–199.                         R. An updated meta-analysis on the effectiveness of preoper-
         48. Noblett  SE,  Watson  DS,  Huong  H,  Davison  B,  Hainsworth ative prophylactic antibiotics in patients undergoing breast 
           PJ,  Horgan  AF. Pre-operative  oral  carbohydrate  loading  in surgical procedures. Breast J. 2012;18:312–317.
           colorectal surgery: A randomized controlled trial. Colorectal  67. Olsen  MA,  Nickel  KB,  Fox  IK,  et  al.  Incidence  of  surgical 
           Dis. 2006;8:563–569.                                         site infection following mastectomy with and without imme-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0  49. Nygren J, Thorell A, Ljungqvist O. Preoperative oral carbo- diate reconstruction using private insurer claims data. Infect 
           hydrate nutrition: An update. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2015;36:907–914.

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 2001;4:255–259.  68. Winocour  S,  Martinez-Jorge  J,  Habermann  E,  Thomsen 
         50. Gustafsson UO, Nygren J, Thorell A, et al. Pre-operative car- K,  Lemaine  V. Early  surgical  site  infection  following  tissue 
           bohydrate loading may be used in type 2 diabetes patients.   expander  breast  reconstruction  with  or  without  acellular 
           Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2008;52:946–951.                    dermal  matrix:  National  benchmarking  using  National 
         51. Lemaine V, McCarthy C, Kaplan K, et al. Venous thrombo-    Surgical  Quality  Improvement  Program. Arch Plast Surg. 
           embolism  following  microsurgical  breast  reconstruction:  2015;42:194–200.
           An objective analysis in 225 consecutive patients using low-  69. Jones  DJ,  Bunn  F,  Bell-Syer  SV.  Prophylactic  antibiotics  to 
           molecular-weight  heparin  prophylaxis. Plast Reconstr Surg. prevent  surgical  site  infection  after  breast  cancer  surgery. 
           2011;127:1399–1406.                                          Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;3:CD005360.
         52. Masoomi  H,  Paydar  KZ,  Wirth  GA,  Aly  A,  Kobayashi  MR,  70. Huang N, Liu M, Yu P, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis in pros-
           Evans GR. Predictive risk factors of venous thromboembo-     thesis-based  mammoplasty:  A  systematic  review. Int J Surg. 
           lism in autologous breast reconstruction surgery. Ann Plast  2015;15:31–37.
           Surg. 2014;72:30–33.                                      71. Hardwicke JT, Bechar J, Skillman JM. Are systemic antibiotics 
         53. Tran BH, Nguyen TJ, Hwang BH, et al. Risk factors associ-  indicated in aesthetic breast surgery? A systematic review of 
           ated  with  venous  thromboembolism  in  49,028  mastectomy  the literature. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;131:1395–1403.
           patients. Breast 2013;22:444–448.                         72. Cabaluna  ND,  Uy  GB,  Galicia  RM,  Cortez  SC,  Yray  MD, 
         54. Murphy  RX  Jr,  Alderman  A,  Gutowski  K,  et  al.  Evidence- Buckley  BS.  A  randomized,  double-blinded  placebo-con-
           based practices for thromboembolism prevention: Summary      trolled clinical trial of the routine use of preoperative anti-
           of the ASPS Venous Thromboembolism Task Force Report.        biotic  prophylaxis  in  modified  radical  mastectomy. World J 
           Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;130:168e–175e.                     Surg. 2013;37:59–66.
         55. Caprini JA. Thrombosis risk assessment as a guide to quality  73. Collins  JB,  Verheyden  CN,  Mahabir  RC.  Core  mea-
           patient care. Dis Mon. 2005;51:70–78.                        sures:  Implications  for  plastic  surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
         56. Patiar S, Kirwan CC, McDowell G, Bundred NJ, McCollum      2013;131:1266–1271.
           CN, Byrne GJ. Prevention of venous thromboembolism in sur-  74. Thomas R, Alvino P, Cortino GR, et al. Long-acting versus 
           gical patients with breast cancer. Br J Surg. 2007;94:412–420. short-acting cephalosporins for preoperative prophylaxis in 
         57. Rasmussen  MS,  Jørgensen  LN,  Wille-Jørgensen  P,  et  al. breast  surgery:  A  randomized  double-blind  trial  involving 
           Prolonged  thromboprophylaxis  with  low  molecular  weight  1,766 patients. Chemotherapy 1999;45:217–223.
           heparin for abdominal or pelvic surgery. Cochrane Database  75. Drury KE, Lanier ST, Khavanin N, et al. Impact of postop-
           Syst Rev. 2009;1:CD004318.                                   erative antibiotic prophylaxis duration on surgical site infec-
         58. Kim EK, Eom JS, Ahn SH, Son BH, Lee TJ. The efficacy of    tions  in  autologous  breast  reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg. 
           prophylactic  low-molecular-weight  heparin  to  prevent  pul- 2016;76:174–179.
           monary thromboembolism in immediate breast reconstruc-    76. Craft RO, Damjanovic B, Colwell AS. Evidence-based proto-
           tion using the TRAM flap.Plast  Reconstr Surg. 2009;123:9–12. col for infection control in immediate implant-based breast 
         59. Pannucci CJ, Wachtman CF, Dreszer G, et al. The effect of  reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg. 2012;69:446–450.
           postoperative enoxaparin on risk for reoperative hematoma.  77. Dumville JC, McFarlane E, Edwards P, et al. Preoperative skin 
           Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129:160–168.                       antiseptics  for  preventing  surgical  wound  infections  after 
         60. Liao  EC,  Taghinia  AH,  Nguyen  LP,  Yueh  JH,  May  JW  Jr, clean surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;4:CD003949.
           Orgill DP. Incidence of hematoma complication with hepa-  78. Drinane JJ, Bergman RS, Folkers BL, Kortes MJ. Revisiting 
           rin venous thrombosis prophylaxis after TRAM flap breast     triple antibiotic irrigation of breast implant pockets: A pla-
           reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;121:1101–1107.     cebo-controlled  single  practice  cohort  study. Plast Reconstr 
         61. Lapid  O,  Pietersen  L,  van  der  Horst  CM.  Reoperation  for Surg Glob Open 2013;1:e55.
           haematoma after breast reduction with preoperative admin-  79. Singhal AK, Kannan S, Gota VS. 5HT3 antagonists for pro-
           istration of low-molecular-weight heparin: Experience in 720 phylaxis of postoperative nausea and vomiting in breast sur-
           patients. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2012;65:1513–1517.  gery: A meta-analysis. J Postgrad Med. 2012;58:23–31.
         62. Hardy RG, Williams L, Dixon JM. Use of enoxaparin results  80. Olanders KJ, Lundgren GA, Johansson AM. Betamethasone 
           in  more  haemorrhagic  complications  after  breast  surgery in prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting follow-
           than unfractionated heparin. Br J Surg. 2008;95:834–836.     ing breast surgery. J Clin Anesth. 2014;26:461–465.
         63. Cruse PJ, Foord R. The epidemiology of wound infection: A  81. Gómez-Hernández  J,  Orozco-Alatorre  AL,  Domínguez-
           10-year prospective study of 62,939 wounds. Surg Clin North  Contreras  M,  et  al.  Preoperative  dexamethasone  reduces 
           Am. 1980;60:27–40.                                           postoperative pain, nausea and vomiting following mastec-
         64. Sanguinetti A, Rosato L, Cirocchi R, et al. Antibiotic prophy- tomy for breast cancer. BMC Cancer 2010;10:692.
           laxis in breast surgery: Preliminary results of a multicenter  82. Gupta  P,  Jain  S.  Postoperative  nausea  and  vomiting  pro-
           randomized study on 1400 cases (in Italian). Ann Ital Chir.  phylaxis:  A  comparative  study  of  ondansetron,  granisetron 
           2009;80:275–279.                                             and  granisetron  and  dexamethasone  combination  after 
         65. Phillips BT, Bishawi M, Dagum AB, Bui DT, Khan SU. A sys-  modified radical mastectomy. Saudi J Anaesth. 2014;8(Suppl 
           tematic  review  of  infection  rates  and  associated  antibiotic 1):S67–S71.
           duration  in  acellular  dermal  matrix  breast  reconstruction.  83. Diemunsch  P, Gan  TJ,  Philip  BK,  et  al.;  Aprepitant-PONV 
           Eplasty 2014;14:e42.                                         Protocol  091  International  Study  Group.  Single-dose 

        1066e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


        Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

           aprepitant vs ondansetron for the prevention of postopera-  99. Imai Y, Mammoto T, Murakami K, et al. The effects of pre-
           tive nausea and vomiting: A randomized, double-blind phase    anesthetic oral clonidine on total requirement of propofol 
           III trial in patients undergoing open abdominal surgery. Br J for general anesthesia. J Clin Anesth. 1998;10:660–665.
           Anaesth. 2007;99:202–211.                                 100. Adam  F,  Libier  M,  Oszustowicz  T,  Lefebvre  D,  Beal  J, 
         84. Habib  AS,  Gan  TJ.  CON:  Postoperative  nausea  and  vomit- Meynadier J. Preoperative small-dose ketamine has no pre-
           ing database research: Limitations and opportunities. Anesth  emptive analgesic effect in patients undergoing total mas-
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Analg. 2010;110:412–414. tectomy. Anesth Analg. 1999;89:444–447.

         85. Jung WS, Kim YB, Park HY, Choi WJ, Yang HS. Oral admin-  101. Exadaktylos AK, Buggy DJ, Moriarty DC, Mascha E, Sessler 

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 istration  of  aprepitant  to  prevent  postoperative  nausea  in DI.  Can  anesthetic  technique  for  primary  breast  cancer 
           highly susceptible patients after gynecological laparoscopy.  surgery  affect  recurrence  or  metastasis? Anesthesiology 
           J Anesth. 2013;27:396–401.                                    2006;105:660–664.
         86. Sinha  AC,  Singh  PM,  Williams  NW,  Ochroch  EA,  Goudra  102. Buckley A, McQuaid S, Johnson P, Buggy DJ. Effect of anaes-
           BG.  Aprepitant’s  prophylactic  efficacy  in  decreasing  post- thetic technique on the natural killer cell anti-tumour activ-
           operative  nausea  and  vomiting  in  morbidly  obese  patients ity of serum from women undergoing breast cancer surgery: 
           undergoing bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2014;24:225–231.     A pilot study. Br J Anaesth. 2014;113(Suppl 1):i56–i62.
         87. Vallejo  MC,  Phelps  AL,  Ibinson  JW,  et  al.  Aprepitant  plus  103. Biki B, Mascha E, Moriarty DC, Fitzpatrick JM, Sessler DI, 
           ondansetron  compared  with  ondansetron  alone  in  reduc-   Buggy DJ. Anesthetic technique for radical prostatectomy 
           ing  postoperative  nausea  and  vomiting  in  ambulatory     surgery affects cancer recurrence: A retrospective analysis. 
           patients  undergoing  plastic  surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg.  Anesthesiology 2008;109:180–187.
           2012;129:519–526.                                         104. Gupta A, Björnsson A, Fredriksson M, Hallböök O, Eintrei 
         88. Habib AS, Keifer JC, Borel CO, White WD, Gan TJ. A compari- C.  Reduction  in  mortality  after  epidural  anaesthesia  and 
           son of the combination of aprepitant and dexamethasone ver-   analgesia  in  patients  undergoing  rectal  but  not  colonic 
           sus the combination of ondansetron and dexamethasone for      cancer  surgery:  A  retrospective  analysis  of  data  from  655 
           the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting in patients patients in central Sweden. Br J Anaesth. 2011;107:164–170.
           undergoing craniotomy. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:813–818.    105. The  Cleveland  Clinic.  Regional  Anesthesia  and  Breast 
         89. Grover  VK,  Mathew  PJ,  Yaddanapudi  S,  Sehgal  S.  A  single Cancer  Recurrence.  ClinicalTrials.gov identification  num-
           dose  of  preoperative  gabapentin  for  pain  reduction  and ber NCT00418457. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/
           requirement  of  morphine  after  total  mastectomy  and  axil- ct2/show/NCT00418457. Accessed April 3, 2015.
           lary  dissection:  Randomized  placebo-controlled  double-  106. Glissmeyer  C,  Johnson  W,  Sherman  B,  Glissmeyer  M, 
           blind trial. J Postgrad Med. 2009;55:257–260.                 Garreau J, Johnson N. Effect of paravertebral nerve blocks 
         90. Dirks  J,  Fredensborg  BB,  Christensen  D,  Fomsgaard  JS, on narcotic use after mastectomy with reconstruction. Am J 
           Flyger H, Dahl JB. A randomized study of the effects of sin-  Surg. 2015;209:881–883.
           gle-dose  gabapentin  versus  placebo  on  postoperative  pain  107. Zhong  T,  Ojha  M,  Bagher  S,  et  al.  Transversus  abdomi-
           and morphine consumption after mastectomy. Anesthesiology     nis  plane  block  reduces  morphine  consumption  in 
           2002;97:560–564.                                              the  early  postoperative  period  following  microsurgical 
         91. Kim SY, Song JW, Park B, Park S, An YJ, Shim YH. Pregabalin abdominal  tissue  breast  reconstruction:  A  double-blind, 
           reduces  post-operative  pain  after  mastectomy:  A  double- placebo-controlled,  randomized  trial. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
           blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Acta Anaesthesiol 2014;134:870–878.
           Scand. 2011;55:290–296.                                   108. Karmakar MK, Samy W, Li JW, et al. Thoracic paravertebral 
         92. Priya V, Divatia JV, Sareen R, Upadhye S. Efficacy of intrave- block  and  its  effects  on  chronic  pain  and  health-related 
           nous  ketoprofen  for  pre-emptive  analgesia. J Postgrad Med. quality of life after modified radical mastectomy. Reg Anesth 
           2002;48:109–112.                                              Pain Med. 2014;39:289–298.
         93. Sun M, Liao Q, Wen L, Yan X, Zhang F, Ouyang W. Effect  109. Hong JY, Kang YS, Kil HK. Anaesthesia for day case excisional 
           of perioperative intravenous flurbiprofen axetil on chronic   breast  biopsy:  Propofol-remifentanil  compared  with  sevo-
           postmastectomy pain. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban      flurane-nitrous oxide.Eur  J Anaesthesiol. 2008;25:460–467.
           2013;38:653–660.                                          110. Chen  HP,  Hsu  YH,  Hua  KC,  Lin  CC,  Lo  YF,  Yu  HP. 
         94. Riest G, Peters J, Weiss M, et al. Does perioperative adminis- Comparison of sevoflurane versus propofol under auditory 
           tration of rofecoxib improve analgesia after spine, breast and evoked potential monitoring in female patients undergoing 
           orthopaedic surgery? Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2006;23:219–226.     breast surgery. Biomed J. 2013;36:125–131.
         95. Zielinski  J,  Jaworski  R,  Smietanska  I,  Irga  N,  Wujtewicz  M,  111. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Clinical 
           Jaskiewicz J. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled  practice  guideline:  The  management  of  inadvertent  peri-
           trial  of  preemptive  analgesia  with  bupivacaine  in  patients operative  hypothermia  in  adults.  National  Collaborating 
           undergoing mastectomy for carcinoma of the breast. Med Sci    Centre for Nursing and Supportive care commissioned by 
           Monit. 2011;17:CR589–CR597.                                   National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): 
         96. Segerdahl M, Ekblom A, Sandelin K, Wickman M, Sollevi A.    April  2008.  Available  at:  http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
           Peroperative adenosine infusion reduces the requirements      CG65. Accessed April 3, 2015.
           for  isoflurane  and  postoperative  analgesics. Anesth Analg.  112. Kurz A, Sessler DI, Lenhardt R. Perioperative normother-
           1995;80:1145–1149.                                            mia  to  reduce  the  incidence  of  surgical-wound  infection 
         97. De Oliveira GS, Bialek J, Fitzgerald P, Kim JY, McCarthy RJ. and shorten hospitalization. Study of Wound Infection and 
           Systemic  magnesium  to  improve  quality  of  post-surgical  Temperature Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1209–1215.
           recovery  in  outpatient  segmental  mastectomy:  A  random-  113. Huh J, Cho YB, Yang MK, Yoo YK, Kim DK. What influence 
           ized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial. Magnes Res.  does  intermittent  pneumatic  compression  of  the  lower 
           2013;26:156–164.                                              limbs  intraoperatively  have  on  core  hypothermia? Surg 
         98. Amr YM, Yousef AA. Evaluation of efficacy of the periopera- Endosc. 2013;27:2087–2093.
           tive administration of Venlafaxine or gabapentin on acute and  114. Roberson  MC,  Dieckmann  LS,  Rodriguez  RE,  Austin 
           chronic postmastectomy pain. Clin J Pain 2010;26:381–385.     PN.  A  review  of  the  evidence  for  active  preoperative 

                                                                                                                     1067e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                                     Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

            warming of adults undergoing general anesthesia. AANA J.     randomized  assessor-blinded  multicenter  trial. Ann Surg. 
            2013;81:351–356.                                             2003;238:641–648.
         115. Brandes IF, Müller C, Perl T, Russo SG, Bauer M, Bräuer A.  131. Varadhan  KK,  Lobo  DN.  A  meta-analysis  of  randomised 
            Efficacy of a novel warming blanket: Prospective random-     controlled trials of intravenous fluid therapy in major elec-
            ized trial (in German). Anaesthesist 2013;62:137–142.        tive  open  abdominal  surgery:  Getting  the  balance  right. 
         116. Deren  ME,  Machan  JT,  DiGiovanni  CW,  Ehrlich  MG,     Proc Nutr Soc. 2010;69:488–498.
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Gillerman RG. Prewarming operating rooms for prevention  132. Taniguchi  H,  Sasaki  T, Fujita  H,  et  al.  Preoperative  fluid 
            of  intraoperative  hypothermia  during  total  knee  and  hip and electrolyte management with oral rehydration therapy. 

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 arthroplasties. J Arthroplasty 2011;26:1380–1386. J Anesth. 2009;23:222–229.
         117. Munday  J,  Hines  S,  Wallace  K,  Chang  AM,  Gibbons  K,  133. Abbas SM, Hill AG. Systematic review of the literature for the 
            Yates  P. A  systematic  review  of  the  effectiveness  of  warm- use of oesophageal Doppler monitor for fluid replacement 
            ing interventions for women undergoing cesarean section.     in major abdominal surgery. Anaesthesia 2008;63:44–51.
            Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2014;11:383–393.             134. Funk D, Bohn J, Mutch W, Hayakawa T, Buchel EW. Goal-
         118. Röder  G,  Sessler  DI,  Roth  G,  Schopper  C,  Mascha  EJ, directed  fluid  therapy  for  microvascular  free  flap recon-
            Plattner  O.  Intra-operative  rewarming  with  Hot  Dog     struction  following  mastectomy:  A  pilot  study. Plast Surg 
             resistive  heating  and  forced-air  heating:  A  trial  of  lower- (Oakv.) 2015;23:231–234.
            body warming. Anaesthesia 2011;66:667–674.               135. Rollins KE, Lobo DN. Intraoperative goal-directed fluid ther-
         119. Engelen S, Himpe D, Borms S, et al. An evaluation of under- apy in elective major abdominal surgery: A meta-analysis of 
            body forced-air and resistive heating during hypothermic,    randomized controlled trials. Ann Surg. 2016;263:465–476.
            on-pump cardiac surgery. Anaesthesia 2011;66:104–110.    136. Pearse  R,  Dawson  D,  Fawcett  J,  Rhodes  A,  Grounds  RM, 
         120. Poveda Vde B, Martinez EZ, Galvão CM. Active cutaneous     Bennett  ED.  Changes  in  central  venous  saturation  after 
            warming systems to prevent intraoperative hypothermia: A     major  surgery,  and  association  with  outcome. Crit Care 
            systematic review. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2012;20:183–191.   2005;9:R694–R699.
         121. Moysés  AM,  dos  Santos  Trettene  A,  Navarro  LH,  Ayres  137. Nelson JA, Fischer JP, Grover R, et al. Intraoperative per-
            JA.  Hypothermia  prevention  during  surgery:  Comparison   fusion  management  impacts  postoperative  outcomes:  An 
            between  thermal  mattress  and  thermal  blanket  (in       analysis of 682 autologous breast reconstruction patients. J 
            Portuguese). Rev Esc Enferm USP 2014;48:228–235.             Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2015;68:175–183.
         122. Egan C, Bernstein E, Reddy D, et al. A randomized com-  138. Soni  N.  British  Consensus  Guidelines  on  Intravenous 
            parison  of  intraoperative  PerfecTemp  and  forced-air     Fluid  Therapy  for  Adult  Surgical  Patients  (GIFTASUP): 
            warming  during  open  abdominal  surgery. Anesth Analg.     Cassandra’s view. Anaesthesia 2009;64:235–238.
            2011;113:1076–1081.                                      139. Giglio MT, Marucci M, Testini M, Brienza N. Goal-directed 
         123. Pu Y, Cen G, Sun J, et al. Warming with an underbody warm- haemodynamic therapy and gastrointestinal complications 
            ing system reduces intraoperative hypothermia in patients    in major surgery: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
            undergoing  laparoscopic  gastrointestinal  surgery:  A  ran- trials. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103:637–646.
            domized controlled study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2014;51:181–189.  140. Lobo DN, Bostock KA, Neal KR, Perkins AC, Rowlands BJ, 
         124. Hasegawa K, Negishi C, Nakagawa F, Ozaki M. Core tem-      Allison SP. Effect of salt and water balance on recovery of 
            peratures  during  major  abdominal  surgery  in  patients   gastrointestinal function after elective colonic resection: A 
            warmed  with  new  circulating-water  garment,  forced-air   randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2002;359:1812–1818.
            warming, or carbon-fiber resistive-heating system. J Anesth.  141. Nisanevich V, Felsenstein I, Almogy G, Weissman C, Einav 
            2012;26:168–173.                                             S,  Matot  I.  Effect  of  intraoperative  fluid  management 
         125. Andrzejowski JC, Turnbull D, Nandakumar A, Gowthaman       on  outcome  after  intraabdominal  surgery. Anesthesiology 
            S,  Eapen  G.  A  randomised  single  blinded  study  of  the 2005;103:25–32.
            administration of pre-warmed fluid vs active fluid warming  142. Zhong  T, Neinstein  R,  Massey  C,  et  al.  Intravenous  fluid 
            on  the  incidence  of  peri-operative  hypothermia  in  short infusion  rate  in  microsurgical  breast  reconstruction: 
            surgical procedures. Anaesthesia 2010;65:942–945.            Important lessons learned from 354 free flaps.Plast  Reconstr 
         126. Oh JH, Kim JY, Chung SW, et al. Warmed irrigation fluid    Surg. 2011;128:1153–1160.
            does  not  decrease  perioperative  hypothermia  during  143. Booi DI. Perioperative fluid overload increases anastomosis 
            arthroscopic shoulder surgery. Arthroscopy 2014;30:159–164.  thrombosis  in  the  free  TRAM  flap  used  for  breast  recon-
         127. Han  SB,  Gwak  MS,  Choi  SJ,  et  al.  Effect  of  active  airway struction. Eur J Plast Surg. 2011;34:81–86.
            warming on body core temperature during adult liver trans-  144. Franklin J, Yoo J, Matthews TW, et al. Morbidity associated 
            plantation. Transplant Proc. 2013;45:251–254.                with  perioperative  fluid  management  in  free  flap  recon-
         128. Inoue  S,  Shinjo  T,  Kawaguchi  M,  Nakajima  Y,  Furuya  H. struction of the head and neck. Western Section Triological 
            Amino  acid  infusions  started  after  development  of  intra- Society Meeting. Laryngoscope 2002;112:765–766.
            operative  core  hypothermia  do  not  affect  rewarming  but  145. Clark JR, McCluskey SA, Hall F, et al. Predictors of morbid-
            reduce  the  incidence  of  postoperative  shivering  during ity following free flap reconstruction for cancer of the head 
            major  abdominal  surgery:  A  randomized  trial. J Anesth.  and neck. Head Neck 2007;29:1090–1101.
            2011;25:850–854.                                         146. Chen C, Nguyen MD, Bar-Meir E, et al. Effects of vasopres-
         129. Gozdemir  M,  Usta  B,  Demircioglu  RI,  Muslu  B,  Sert  H, sor administration on the outcomes of microsurgical breast 
            Karatas OF. Magnesium sulfate infusion prevents shivering    reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg. 2010;65:28–31.
            during transurethral prostatectomy with spinal anesthesia:  147. Kelly DA, Reynolds M, Crantford C, Pestana IA. Impact of 
            A  randomized,  double-blinded,  controlled  study. J Clin   intraoperative  vasopressor  use  in  free  tissue  transfer  for 
            Anesth. 2010;22:184–189.                                     head, neck, and extremity reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg. 
         130. Brandstrup  B,  Tønnesen  H,  Beier-Holgersen  R,  et  al.; 2014;72:S135–S138.
            Danish Study Group on Perioperative Fluid Therapy. Effects  148. Harris L, Goldstein D, Hofer S, Gilbert R. Impact of vaso-
            of intravenous fluid restriction on postoperative complica-  pressors on outcomes in head and neck free tissue transfer. 
            tions: Comparison of two perioperative fluid regimens. A     Microsurgery 2012;32:15–19.

        1068e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


        Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

         149. Suominen S, Svartling N, Silvasti M, Niemi T, Kuokkanen  166. Boehmler JH IV, Venturi ML, Nahabedian MY. Decreased 
            H,  Asko-Seljavaara  S.  The  effect  of  intravenous  dopa- narcotic use with an implantable local anesthetic catheter 
            mine  and  dobutamine  on  blood  circulation  during  a     after deep inferior epigastric perforator flap breast recon-
            microvascular  TRAM  flap  operation. Ann Plast Surg.        struction. Ann Plast Surg. 2009;62:618–620.
            2004;53:425–431.                                         167. Zhong T, Ojha M, Bagher S, et al. Abstract 16: The analgesic 
         150. Disa  JJ,  Polvora  VP,  Pusic  AL,  Singh  B,  Cordeiro  PG. efficacy of the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block on 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Dextran-related complications in head and neck microsur- the abdominal donor site following autologous tissue breast 
            gery: Do the benefits outweigh the risks? A prospective ran- reconstruction:  A  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  ran-

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 domized analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2003;112:1534–1539. domized trial. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(Suppl):25–26.
         151. McNicol  ED,  Tzortzopoulou  A,  Cepeda  MS,  et  al.  Single-  168. Dasta J, Ramamoorthy S, Patou G, Sinatra R. Bupivacaine 
            dose intravenous paracetamol or propacetamol for preven-     liposome injectable suspension compared with bupivacaine 
            tion or treatment of postoperative pain: A systematic review HCl for the reduction of opioid burden in the postsurgical 
            and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106:764–775.           setting. Curr Med Res Opin. 2012;28:1609–1615.
         152. Hein  A,  Norlander  C,  Blom  L,  Jakobsson  J.  Is  pain  pro-  169. Rohde CH, Taylor EM, Alonso A, Ascherman JA, Hardy KL, 
            phylaxis in minor gynaecological surgery of clinical value?  Pilla AA. Pulsed electromagnetic fields reduce postopera-
            A  double-blind  placebo  controlled  study  of  paracetamol tive interleukin-1β, pain, and inflammation: A double-blind, 
            1 g  versus  lornoxicam  8 mg  given  orally. Ambul Surg.    placebo-controlled study in TRAM flap breast reconstruc-
            2001;9:91–94.                                                tion patients. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;135:808e–817e.
         153. Derry CJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Single dose oral ibuprofen  170. Lambert E, Carey S. Practice guideline recommendations 
            plus paracetamol (acetaminophen) for acute postoperative     on perioperative fasting: A systematic review. JPEN J Parenter 
            pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;6:CD010210.           Enteral Nutr. 2016;40:1158–1165.
         154. Hall  PE,  Derry  S,  Moore  RA,  et  al.  Single  dose  oral  lor-  171. Lewis  SJ,  Egger  M,  Sylvester  PA,  Thomas  S.  Early  enteral 
            noxicam  for  acute  postoperative  pain  in  adults. Cochrane feeding versus “nil by mouth” after gastrointestinal surgery: 
            Database Syst Rev. 2009;4:CD007441.                          Systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials. BMJ 
         155. Barden J, Derry S, McQuay HJ, et al. Single dose oral keto- 2001;323:773–776.
            profen and dexketoprofen for acute postoperative pain in  172. Bui  DT,  Cordeiro  PG,  Hu  QY,  Disa  JJ,  Pusic  A,  Mehrara 
            adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;4:CD007355.         BJ.  Free  flap  reexploration:  Indications,  treatment, 
         156. Legeby M, Sandelin K, Wickman M, Olofsson C. Analgesic     and  outcomes  in  1193  free  flaps. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
            efficacy of diclofenac in combination with morphine and      2007;119:2092–2100.
            paracetamol after mastectomy and immediate breast recon-  173. Chang  EI,  Carlsen  BT, Festekjian  JH,  Da  Lio  AL,  Crisera 
            struction. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2005;49:1360–1366.       CA.  Salvage  rates  of  compromised  free  flap  breast  recon-
         157. Sharma S, Chang DW, Koutz C, et al. Incidence of hema-     struction  after  recurrent  thrombosis. Ann Plast Surg. 
            toma  associated  with  ketorolac  after  TRAM  flap  breast 2013;71:68–71.
            reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;107:352–355.   174. Masoomi H, Clark EG, Paydar KZ, et al. Predictive risk fac-
         158. Gobble RM, Hoang HL, Kachniarz B, Orgill DP. Ketorolac     tors  of  free  flap  thrombosis  in  breast  reconstruction- sur
            does  not  increase  perioperative  bleeding:  A  meta-anal- gery. Microsurgery 2014;34:589–594.
            ysis  of  randomized  controlled  trials. Plast Reconstr Surg.  175. Stollings  JL,  Diedrich  DA,  Oyen  LJ,  Brown  DR.  Rapid-
            2014;133:741–755.                                            sequence intubation: A review of the process and consid-
         159. Jarupongprapa S, Ussavasodhi P, Katchamart W. Comparison   erations  when  choosing  medications. Ann Pharmacother. 
            of gastrointestinal adverse effects between cyclooxygenase-2 2014;48:62–76.
            inhibitors  and  non-selective,  non-steroidal  anti-inflamma-  176. Nahabedian MY, Momen B, Manson PN. Factors associated 
            tory drugs plus proton pump inhibitors: A systematic review  with anastomotic failure after microvascular reconstruction 
            and meta-analysis. J Gastroenterol. 2013;48:830–838.         of the breast. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2004;114:74–82.
         160. Padol IT, Hunt RH. Association of myocardial infarctions  177. Mirzabeigi MN, Wang T, Kovach SJ, Taylor JA, Serletti JM, 
            with  COX-2  inhibition  may  be  related  to  immunomodu-   Wu LC. Free flap take-back following postoperative micro-
            lation  towards  a  Th1  response  resulting  in  atheromatous vascular compromise: Predicting salvage versus failure. Plast 
            plaque  instability:  An  evidence-based  interpretation.    Reconstr Surg. 2012;130:579–589.
            Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010;49:837–843.                   178. Disa JJ, Cordeiro PG, Hidalgo DA. Efficacy of conventional 
         161. Seib RK, Paul JE. Preoperative gabapentin for postoperative monitoring  techniques  in  free  tissue  transfer:  An  11-year 
            analgesia: A meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth. 2006;53:461–469.  experience  in  750  consecutive  cases. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
         162. Engelman  E,  Cateloy  F.  Efficacy  and  safety  of  periopera- 1999;104:97–101.
            tive  pregabalin  for  post-operative  pain:  A  meta-analysis  179. Schmulder A, Gur E, Zaretski A. Eight-year experience of the 
            of  randomized-controlled  trials. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand.  Cook-Swartz Doppler in free-flap operations: Microsurgical 
            2011;55:927–943.                                             and reexploration results with regard to a wide spectrum of 
         163. Zhang  J,  Ho  KY,  Wang  Y.  Efficacy  of  pregabalin  in surgeries. Microsurgery 2011;31:1–6.
            acute  postoperative  pain:  A  meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth.  180. Rozen WM, Chubb D, Whitaker IS, Acosta R. The efficacy 
            2011;106:454–462.                                            of postoperative monitoring: A single surgeon comparison 
         164. Heller L, Kowalski AM, Wei C, Butler CE. Prospective, ran- of clinical monitoring and the implantable Doppler probe 
            domized, double-blind trial of local anesthetic infusion and in 547 consecutive free flaps.Microsurgery  2010;30:105–110.
            intravenous  narcotic  patient-controlled  anesthesia  pump  181. Whitaker  IS,  Rozen  WM,  Chubb  D,  et  al.  Postoperative 
            for pain management after free TRAM flap breast recon-       monitoring  of  free  flaps  in  autologous  breast  reconstruc-
            struction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;122:1010–1018.          tion: A multicenter comparison of 398 flaps using clinical 
         165. Morrison JE Jr, Jacobs VR. Reduction or elimination of post- monitoring,  microdialysis,  and  the  implantable  Doppler 
            operative  pain  medication  after  mastectomy  through  use probe. J Reconstr Microsurg. 2010;26:409–416.
            of a temporarily placed local anesthetic pump vs. control  182. Smit  JM,  Werker  PM,  Liss  AG,  et  al.  Introduction  of  the 
            group. Zentralbl Gynakol. 2003;125:17–22.                    implantable Doppler system did not lead to an increased 

                                                                                                                     1069e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


                                                                     Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery • May 2017

            salvage rate of compromised flaps: A multivariate analysis.  200. Blom RL, van Heijl M, Bemelman WA, et al. Initial experi-
            Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;125:1710–1717.                     ences of an enhanced recovery protocol in esophageal sur-
         183. Um GT, Chang J, Louie O, et al. Implantable Cook-Swartz    gery. World J Surg. 2013;37:2372–2378.
            Doppler  probe  versus  Synovis  Flow  Coupler  for  the  post-  201. Jones C, Kelliher L, Dickinson M, et al. Randomized clinical 
            operative  monitoring  of  free  flap  breast  reconstruction. J trial on enhanced recovery versus standard care following 
            Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2014;67:960–966.                open liver resection. Br J Surg. 2013;100:1015–1024.
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0  184. Pelletier A, Tseng C, Agarwal S, Park J, Song D. Cost analysis  202. van Dam RM, Hendry PO, Coolsen MM, et al.; Enhanced 
            of near-infrared spectroscopy tissue oximetry for monitor-   Recovery  After  Surgery  (ERAS)  Group.  Initial  expe-

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 ing autologous free tissue breast reconstruction. J Reconstr rience  with  a  multimodal  enhanced  recovery  pro-
            Microsurg. 2011;27:487–494.                                  gramme  in  patients  undergoing  liver  resection. Br J Surg. 
         185. Lin SJ, Nguyen MD, Chen C, et al. Tissue oximetry moni-    2008;95:969–975.
            toring in microsurgical breast reconstruction decreases flap  203. Ramírez  JM,  Blasco  JA,  Roig  JV,  et  al.;  Spanish  working 
            loss  and  improves  rate  of  flap  salvage. Plast Reconstr Surg. group on fast track surgery. Enhanced recovery in colorec-
            2011;127:1080–1085.                                          tal surgery: A multicentre study. BMC Surg. 2011;11:9.
         186. Duteille  F, Rouif  M,  Alfandari  B,  et  al.  Reduction  of  skin  204. Vlug MS, Bartels SA, Wind J, Ubbink DT, Hollmann MW, 
            closure time without loss of healing quality: A multicenter  Bemelman  WA;  Collaborative  LAFA  Study  Group.  Which 
            prospective  study  in  100  patients  comparing  the  use  of fast track elements predict early recovery after colon cancer 
            Insorb  absorbable  staples  with  absorbable  thread  for  der- surgery? Colorectal Dis. 2012;14:1001–1008.
            mal suture. Surg Innov. 2013;20:70–73.                   205. Bartolo M, Zucchella C, Pace A, et al. Early rehabilitation 
         187. Williams  N,  Sweetland  H,  Goyal  S,  Ivins  N,  Leaper  DJ. after  surgery  improves  functional  outcome  in  inpatients 
            Randomized  trial  of  antimicrobial-coated  sutures  to  pre- with brain tumours. J Neurooncol. 2012;107:537–544.
            vent surgical site infection after breast cancer surgery. Surg  206. Convertino  VA.  Cardiovascular  consequences  of  bed  rest: 
            Infect (Larchmt.) 2011;12:469–474.                           Effect  on  maximal  oxygen  uptake. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
         188. Zhang ZT, Zhang HW, Fang XD, et al. Cosmetic outcome       1997;29:191–196.
            and surgical site infection rates of antibacterial absorbable  207. Paddon-Jones  D,  Sheffield-Moore  M,  Cree  MG,  et al.
            (Polyglactin 910) suture compared to Chinese silk suture     Atrophy  and  impaired  muscle  protein  synthesis  during 
            in breast cancer surgery: A randomized pilot research. Chin  prolonged  inactivity  and  stress. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
                        2011;124:719–724.
            Med J (Engl.)                                                2006;91:4836–4841.
         189. Nipshagen MD, Hage JJ, Beekman WH. Use of 2-octyl-cya-
                                                                     208. Testa A, Iannace C, Di Libero L. Strengths of early physical 
            noacrylate skin adhesive (Dermabond) for wound closure 
                                                                         rehabilitation programs in surgical breast cancer patients: 
            following reduction mammaplasty: A prospective, random-
                                                                         Results of a randomized controlled study. Eur J Phys Rehabil 
            ized intervention study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;122:10–18.
                                                                         Med. 2014;50:275–284.
         190. Gennari R, Rotmensz N, Ballardini B, et al. A prospective, 
                                                                     209. Scaffidi M, Vulpiani MC, Vetrano M, et al. Early rehabilita-
            randomized,  controlled  clinical  trial  of  tissue  adhesive 
                                                                         tion reduces the onset of complications in the upper limb 
            (2-octylcyanoacrylate)  versus  standard  wound  closure  in 
                                                                         following  breast  cancer  surgery. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 
            breast surgery. Surgery 2004;136:593–599.
                                                                         2012;48:601–611.
         191. Blondeel  PN,  Richter  D,  Stoff  A,  Exner  K,  Jernbeck  J, 
                                                                     210. Davidge  KM,  Brown  M,  Morgan  P,  Semple  JL.  Processes 
            Ramakrishnan  V. Evaluation  of  a  new  skin  closure  device 
                                                                         of care in autogenous breast reconstruction with pedicled 
            in surgical incisions associated with breast procedures. Ann 
            Plast Surg. 2014;73:631–637.                                 TRAM  flaps:  Expediting  postoperative  discharge  in an
         192. Richter D, Stoff A, Ramakrishnan V, Exner K, Jernbeck J,   ambulatory setting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132:339e–344e.
            Blondeel  PN.  A  comparison  of  a  new  skin  closure  device  211. Cho  HS,  Davis  GC,  Paek  JE,  et  al.  A  randomised  trial  of 
            and intradermal sutures in the closure of full-thickness sur- nursing interventions supporting recovery of the postmas-
            gical incisions. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;130:843–850.      tectomy patient. J Clin Nurs. 2013;22:919–929.
         193. Kerrigan CL, Homa K. Evaluation of a new wound closure  212. Hill O, White K. Exploring women’s experiences of TRAM 
            device for linear surgical incisions: 3M Steri-Strip S Surgical flap breast reconstruction after mastectomy for breast can-
            Skin Closure versus subcuticular closure. Plast Reconstr Surg. cer. Oncol Nurs Forum 2008;35:81–88.
            2010;125:186–194.                                        213. Holtzmann J, Timm H. The experiences of and the nursing 
         194. Veiga DF, Veiga-Filho J, Damasceno CA, et al. Dressing wear care for breast cancer patients undergoing immediate breast 
            time after breast reconstruction: Study protocol for a ran-  reconstruction. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl.) 2005;14:310–318.
            domized controlled trial. Trials 2013;14:58.             214. Armstrong  KA,  Semple  JL,  Coyte  PC.  Replacing  ambula-
         195. Nahabedian  MY.  Achieving  ideal  donor  site  aesthet-   tory surgical follow-up visits with mobile app home moni-
            ics  with  autologous  breast  reconstruction. Gland Surg.   toring: Modeling cost-effective scenarios. J Med Internet Res. 
            2015;4:145–153.                                              2014;16:e213.
         196. Kim JY, Davila AA, Persing S, et al. A meta-analysis of human  215. Temple-Oberle CF, Cook EF, Bettger-Hahn M, Mychailyshyn 
            acellular  dermis  and  submuscular  tissue  expander  breast N,  Naeem  H,  Macdermid  J.  Development  of  a  breast 
            reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129:28–41.         reconstruction  satisfaction  questionnaire  (BRECON-31): 
         197. Kostaras EK, Tansarli GS, Falagas ME. Use of negative-pres- Principal components analysis and clinimetric properties. 
            sure wound therapy in breast tissues: Evaluation of the lit- J Surg Oncol. 2012;106:799–806.
            erature. Surg Infect (Larchmt.) 2014;15:679–685.         216. Pusic AL, Klassen AF, Scott AM, Klok JA, Cordeiro PG, Cano 
         198. Henriksen  MG,  Jensen  MB,  Hansen  HV,  Jespersen  TW,   SJ. Development of a new patient-reported outcome mea-
            Hessov  I.  Enforced  mobilization,  early  oral  feeding,  and sure for breast surgery: The BREAST-Q. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
            balanced analgesia improve convalescence after colorectal    2009;124:345–353.
            surgery. Nutrition 2002;18:147–152.                      217. Varadhan KK, Neal KR, Dejong CH, Fearon KC, Ljungqvist 
         199. Brower  RG.  Consequences  of  bed  rest. Crit Care Med.   O, Lobo DN. The enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) 
            2009;37(Suppl):S422–S428.                                    pathway  for  patients  undergoing  major  elective  open 

        1070e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 


        Volume 139, Number 5 • Enhanced Recovery after Reconstruction

            colorectal  surgery:  A  meta-analysis  of  randomized  con-  220. Nygren  J,  Thacker  J,  Carli  F,  et  al.;  Enhanced  Recovery 
            trolled trials. Clin Nutr. 2010;29:434–440.                  After Surgery Society. Guidelines for perioperative care in 
         218. Ren  L,  Zhu  D,  Wei  Y,  et  al.  Enhanced  Recovery  After elective  rectal/pelvic  surgery:  Enhanced  Recovery  After 
            Surgery (ERAS) program attenuates stress and accelerates     Surgery  (ERAS)  Society  recommendations. Clin Nutr. 
            recovery  in  patients  after  radical  resection  for  colorectal 2012;31:801–816.
            cancer: A prospective randomized controlled trial. World J  221. Dumestre D, Webb C, Temple-Oberle C. Improved recovery 
 Downloaded  from http://journals.lww.com/plasreconsurg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0 Surg. 2012;36:407–414. experience achieved for women undergoing implant-based 

         219. Gustafsson  UO,  Scott  MJ,  Schwenk  W,  et  al.;  Enhanced breast  reconstruction  using  an  Enhanced  Recovery  After 

hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI=  on 04/28/2025 Recovery  After  Surgery  Society.  Guidelines  for  periopera- Surgery (ERAS) model. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017;139:550–559.
            tive  care  in  elective  colonic  surgery:  Enhanced  Recovery  222. Stark PA, Myles PS, Burke JA. Development and psychomet-
            After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations. Clin Nutr.     ric evaluation of a postoperative quality of recovery score: 
            2012;31:783–800.                                             The QoR-15. Anesthesiology 2013;118:1332–1340.


                                                                                                                     1071e
     Copyright © 2017 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. 



