World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-023-07039-9S C I E N T I F I C R E V I E WEnhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS?) Society ConsensusGuidelines for Emergency Laparotomy Part 3: OrganizationalAspects and General Considerations for Managementof the Emergency Laparotomy PatientCarol J. Peden1,2 ¡E Geeta Aggarwal3¡E Robert J. Aitken4¡E Iain D. Anderson5,6 ¡EAngie Balfour7¡E Nicolai Bang Foss8¡E Zara Cooper9,10 ¡E Jugdeep K. Dhesi11,12,13 ¡EW. Brenton French14¡E Michael C. Grant15¡E Folke Hammarqvist16,17 ¡E Sarah P. Hare18¡EJoaquim M. Havens19¡E Daniel N. Holena20¡E Martin Hu ?bner21¡E Carolyn Johnston22¡EJeniffer S. Kim23¡E Nicholas P. Lees24¡E Olle Ljungqvist25¡E Dileep N. Lobo26,27 ¡EShahin Mohseni28¡E Carlos A. Ordon ?ez29,30 ¡E Nial Quiney3¡E Catherine Sharoky31Richard D. Urman32¡E Elizabeth Wick33¡E Christopher L. Wu34¡E Tonia Young-Fadok35Michael J. Scott36,37Accepted: 14 April 2023 / Published online: 5 June 2023? The Author(s) 2023¡E¡EAbstractBackground This is Part 3 of the first consensus guidelines for optimal care of patients undergoing emergencylaparotomy using an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) approach. This paper addresses organizational aspectsof care.Methods Experts in management of the high-risk and emergency general surgical patient were invited to contributeby the International ERAS? Society. PubMed, Cochrane, Embase, and MEDLINE database searches were performedfor ERAS elements and relevant specific topics. Studies were selected with particular attention to randomized clinicaltrials, systematic reviews, meta-analyses and large cohort studies, and reviewed and graded using the Grading ofRecommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation system. Recommendations were made on the bestlevel of evidence, or extrapolation from studies on elective patients when appropriate. A modified Delphi method wasused to validate final recommendations.Results Components of organizational aspects of care were considered. Consensus was reached after three rounds ofa modified Delphi process.Conclusions These guidelines are based on best current available evidence for organizational aspects of an ERAS?approach to patients undergoing emergency laparotomy and include discussion of less common aspects of care for thesurgical patient, including end-of-life issues. These guidelines are not exhaustive but pull together evidence onimportant components of care for this high-risk patient population. As much of the evidence is extrapolated fromelective surgery or emergency general surgery (not specifically laparotomy), many of the components need furtherevaluation in future studies.& Carol J. Pedencarol.peden@gmail.comGeeta Aggarwalgeetaaggarwal@nhs.netRobert J. Aitkenrjaitken@me.comIain D. Andersoniain.anderson@srft.nhs.ukAngie BalfourAngie.balfour@erassociety.orgNicolai Bang Fossnbfoss@gmail.comZara Cooperzcooper@bwh.harvard.edu1231882 AbbreviationsACS American College of SurgeonsASA American Society of AnesthesiologyCGA Comprehensive geriatric assessmenteCART Electronic cardiac arrest triageEGS Emergency general surgeryEL Emergency laparotomyERAS Enhanced recovery after surgeryEWS Early warning scoresFTR Failure to rescueICU Intensive care unitLOS Length of stayMDT Multidisciplinary teamMEWS Modified early warning scoresNELA National emergency laparotomy auditNEWS National early warning scoresNSQIP National surgical quality improvementprogramPACU Postoperative anesthesia care unitPOTTER Predictive optimal trees in emergencysurgery riskP-POSSUM Portsmouth-Physiological and operativeseverity score for the enUmeration ofmortality and morbidityRCT Randomized clinical trialRRT Rapid response teamJugdeep K. DhesiJugdeep.Dhesi@gstt.nhs.ukW. Brenton Frenchwilliam.french@vcuhealth.orgMichael C. Grantmgrant17@jhmi.eduFolke Hammarqvistfolke.hammarqvist@ki.seSarah P. HareSarah.hare1@nhs.netJoaquim M. Havensjhavens@bwh.harvard.eduDaniel N. Holenadholena@mcw.eduMartin Hu ?bnermartin.hubner@chuv.chCarolyn Johnstoncarolyn.johnston@stgeorges.nhs.ukJeniffer S. KimJeniffer.S.Kim@kp.orgNicholas P. Leesnick.lees@srft.nhs.ukOlle Ljungqvistolle.ljungqvist@oru.se123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898IntroductionThis is Part 3 of a three-part guideline. Part 1[1] dealt withbackground and preoperative care including rapid assess-ment and diagnosis, simultaneous resuscitation and opti-mization, and Part 2 (Scott et al. 2023 WJS in press)covered intraoperative and postoperative care. This sectioncovers organizational aspects of management and includesend-of-life issues. The latter important aspect of care wasincluded as the mortality of emergency laparotomy (EL)remains high, and patients may present with low likelihoodof survival [1]. Due to the diverse underlying conditionsand varying presentations of this group of patients, not allpathway components will always be applicable; however,we believe the organizational aspects of care are relevant toall teams, hospitals and systems seeking to implement anenhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) EL pathway.MethodsThis project was initiated by the ERAS? Society. Leadauthors (MS and CP) were invited by the society toestablish a guideline development group (GDG) of health-care professionals with diverse clinical or academicexpertise in the management of patients undergoing EL.The GDG consisted of surgeons, anesthesiologists, a nurse,Dileep N. LoboDileep.Lobo@nottingham.ac.ukShahin Mohsenimohsenishahin@yahoo.comCarlos A. Ordon ?ezordonezcarlosa@gmail.com; carlos.ordonez@fvl.org.coNial Quineynialquiney@nhs.netCatherine SharokyCatherine.Sharoky@pennmedicine.Upenn.eduRichard D. Urmanurmanr@gmail.comElizabeth WickElizabeth.Wick@ucsf.eduChristopher L. Wuwuch@hss.eduTonia Young-Fadokyoungfadok.tonia@mayo.eduMichael J. ScottMichael.Scott@Pennmedicine.Upenn.edu1 Department of Anesthesiology Keck School of Medicine,University of Southern California, 2020 Zonal Avenue IRD322, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USAWorld J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 a geriatrician, and a PhD who supported the organization ofthe literature. Several of the authors were also accredited inintensive care, and the group was selected to ensureinternational representation. There was equal author rep-resentation from the USA and the UK (lead authors MSand CP are both US and UK experienced), with moresurgical representatives from the USA, and more anestheticrepresentatives from the UK reflecting National Emer-gency Laparotomy (NELA) audit involvement. There werefive European authors and two from the rest of the world.We recognize with regret in retrospect that Asia and Africawere not included and will correct this on the next iterationof these guidelines. A list of topics was generated, andgroups of physicians with different backgrounds and fromdifferent countries were assigned to each topic, based ontheir expertise, to perform a literature review of Englishlanguage publications and then to generate recommenda-tions using the GRADE structure [2] and a modified Delphiprocess. Once the topic groups had drafted recommenda-tions, these were collated and sent to the whole group forfeedback. There was then significant review, editing, andresponse to comments, as well as extensive discussion ofappropriate inclusion or modification of the recommenda-tion list. The paper and recommendation list were thencirculated again using a modified Delphi approach to rankthe strength of the recommendation and seek furthercomment. A final Delphi was then undertaken highlighting2 Department of Anesthesiology, Perelman School ofMedicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St,Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA3 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,Royal Surrey County Hospital, Egerton Road,Guildford, Surrey GU5 7XX, UK4 Sir Charles Gardiner Hospital, Hospital Avenue, Nedlands,WA 6009, Australia5 Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Stott La,Salford M6 8HD, UK6 University of Manchester, Manchester, UK7 Western General Hospital, NHS Lothian,Edinburgh EH4 2XU, Scotland8 Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark9 Center for Surgery and Public Health, Harvard MedicalSchool, Brigham and Women¡¦s Hospital, 1620 TremontStreet, Boston, MA 02120, USA10 Division of Trauma, Burns, Surgical Critical Care, andEmergency Surgery, Brigham and Women¡¦s Hospital, 1620Tremont Street, Boston, MA 02120, USA11 Perioperative Medicine for Older People Undergoing Surgery(POPS), Guy¡¦s and St Thomas¡¦ NHS Foundation Trust,London, UK12 Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King¡¦s CollegeLondon, London, UK1883areas where, prior to modification, there had been less than80% agreement, on this final round more than 80% con-sensus was reached. The period searched was from 2005until September 2021, with greater emphasis on recentpublications, randomized clinical trials (RCTs), systematicreviews, meta-analyses and large cohort studies. Withdelays in reconvening the group due to the COVID-19pandemic, an updated search was performed in the Springof 2022. Retrospective studies were considered where noother higher level of evidence was available, and there wasparticular relevance to EL. The final guidelines were thencirculated to all authors for review and identification offurther relevant papers. All authors had access to papersreviewed using a reference library. The guideline devel-opment process used to reach consensus on recommenda-tions was based on the guidance published by the ERAS?Society [3, 4]. Key components of the organization of carewere agreed on and assessed with three circulations of thepaper. A reviewer from the International ERAS? Society(OL) was appointed to provide internal review of theguideline as it developed, on his suggestion and the needfor ERAS recommendations to be measurable for compli-ance and actionable; the paper was re-ordered prior to thefinal Delhi round to place all intra and postoperativecomponents into Part 2 (WJS in press 2023), and othercomponents perhaps less amenable to change by clinicians,such as delivery system structure, into this paper. We13 Research Department of Targeted Intervention, Division ofSurgery & Interventional Science, University CollegeLondon, London, UK14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Department of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth UniversityHealth System, 1200 E. Broad Street, Richmond, VA 23298,USADepartment of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine,Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins UniversitySchool of Medicine, 1800 Orleans Street, Baltimore,MD 21287, USADepartment of Emergency and Trauma Surgery, KarolinskaUniversity Hospital, CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet,Stockholm, SwedenKarolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Ha ?lsova ?gen 3.B85, S 141 86 Stockholm, SwedenDepartment of Anaesthesia, Perioperative Medicine andCritical Care, Medway Maritime Hospital, Windmill Road,Gillingham, Kent ME7 5NY, UKDivision of Trauma, Burns and Surgical Critical Care,Brigham and Women¡¦s Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston,MA 02115, USADivision of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, MedicalCollege of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd,Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA1231884 would suggest that monitoring of these organizationalcomponents should occur at a hospital or system level,consider culture and context, and be separate from theclinical components in the pre-, intra- and postoperativepathways. Discussion of implementation and delivery ofthe whole consensus guidelines pathway is discussed in thispaper.DefinitionsIn these guidelines, EL is defined in line with criteria usedby large cohort studies [5, 6] as described in Part 1[1];therefore, trauma laparotomies, appendectomy and chole-cystectomy are excluded. Most vascular conditions areexcluded, such as laparotomy for vascular pathologyincluding ruptured aortic aneurysm and return to theoperating room with complications following a vascularprocedure. Conditions relating to bowel ischemia such asmesenteric vascular insufficiency are included. The defi-nition of ¡¥¡¥emergency¡¦¡¦ is described in detail in Part 1[1],and in these papers (Part1-Part 3), the term ¡¥¡¥emergency¡¦¡¦ isapplied to all patients with a non-elective, potentially lifethreatening intra-abdominal condition requiring surgery.21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Department of Visceral Surgery, Lausanne UniversityHospital CHUV, University of Lausanne (UNIL), Rue duBugnon 46, 1011 Lausanne, SwitzerlandDepartment of Anaesthesia, St George¡¦s Hospital,Tooting, London, UKKaiser Permanente Research, Department of Research &Evaluation, 100 South Los Robles Ave, 2nd Floor, Pasadena,CA 91101, USADepartment of General & Colorectal Surgery, Salford RoyalNHS Foundation Trust, Scott La, Salford M6 8HD, UKDepartment of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Health,?School of Health and Medical Sciences, Orebro University,?Orebro, SwedenGastrointestinal Surgery, Nottingham Digestive DiseasesCentre and National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Queen¡¦s MedicalCentre, Nottingham University Hospitals and University ofNottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UKMRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal AgeingResearch, Queen¡¦s Medical Centre, School of Life Sciences,University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UKDivision of Trauma and Emergency Surgery, Department ofSurgery, School of Medical Sciences, Orebro UniversityHospital, Orebro University, 701 85 Orebro, SwedenDivision of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Department ofSurgery, Fundacio ?n Valle del Lili, Cra 98 No. 18 ¡V 49,760032 Cali, Colombia123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898ResultsA summary of the ERAS elements for organizationalaspects of care and general management considerations andgrading of recommendations with their respective level ofevidence is described in Table 1.CommentaryEL is required to treat a range of upper and lower gas-trointestinal conditions in patients who also require man-agement of acute physiological derangement before, duringand after surgery. This warrants a specific EL pathway. Inparticular, a high level of intraoperative and postoperativemonitoring is needed to ensure desired physiologicalparameters are attained and maintained. Many of the ele-ments of the pathway are contiguous across pre-, intra- andpostoperative phases of the pathway and are summarized inFig. 1.These guidelines are based on best available currentevidence and will be revised when new evidence thatchanges the recommendations becomes available. Whileevery effort has been made to list correct drugdosages, readers should check drug formulations and30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 Seccio ?n de Cirug? ?a de Trauma y Emergencias, Universidaddel Valle ¡V Hospital Universitario del Valle, Cl 5 No. 36-08,760032 Cali, ColombiaDivision of Traumatology, Surgical Critical Care andEmergency Surgery, University of Pennsylvania,Philadelphia, PA 19104, USADepartment of Anesthesiology, The Ohio State Universityand Wexner Medical Center, 410 West 10th Ave, Columbus,OH 43210, USADepartment of Surgery, University of California SanFrancisco, 513 Parnassus Ave HSW1601, San Francisco,CA 94143, USADepartment of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and PainMedicine, and Department of Anesthesiology, Weill-CornellMedicine, Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street,New York, NY 10021, USADivision of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department ofSurgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo ClinicArizona, 5777 e. Mayo Blvd., Phoenix, AZ 85054, USADepartment of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine,and Leonard Davis Institute for Health Economics,University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia,PA 19104, USAUniversity College London, London, UKWorld J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 1885Table 1 ERAS Emergency Laparotomy Guidelines System Based Recommendations. Consensus Guideline Review and Grading using aModified Delphi Method [2¡V4] Organizational Components of CareERAS Item Part 3 (Part 1, 2 and 3 combined) Guideline Level ofEvidenceRecommendationGrade1. (36) Organization of surgical services for deliveryof emergency general surgery2.(37) Experience of Surgeon and Anesthesiologist 3. (38) Postoperative Levels of Care 4. (39) Ongoing monitoring and management ofongoing physiological derangement, early detectionof complications and avoidance of failure to rescue5. (40) Comprehensive Proactive Care of the OlderSurgical Patient6. (41) Implications of ERAS for emergencylaparotomy for nursing practice7. (42) Measures to improve end-of-life care andreduce non-beneficial surgeryGeneral considerations for surgical management ofthe patient undergoing emergency laparotomyEvery country has a different health system structure,payment system, and geography which can eitherfacilitate or pose barriers to optimal delivery ofcare. Implementing best practice will require greatchange across most health systems. Strongconsideration should be given to establishment ofsurgical and perioperative care teams with expertisededicated to the care of emergency general surgerypatients to optimize outcomesPerioperative care for patients undergoing emergencygeneral surgery and specifically EL should beallocated to surgeons, anesthesiologists andintensivists with expertise that matches the needs ofthe patient. Strong consideration should be given asto how such resources are made available 24 h a dayEnsuring the safe care of the emergencylaparotomy patient postoperativelyIn an ideal health system, all patients would beadmitted to ICU to have a high level of monitoring.A pragmatic approach may be required for a riskscore threshold triggering admission based on localavailability of ICU beds. Patients who cannot beadmitted to a critical care bed, require proactive andongoing observation, and local protocols should bedeveloped for this situationLocal protocols should be developed to implementregular monitoring, including use of a physiologicaltrack and trigger system to alert to deterioration andcomplication development, to promote earlyintervention and prevent failure to rescueMultidisciplinary management of the EL PatientPatients over 65 years of age should be assessed, andco-managed, as early as possible postoperatively bya physician with expertise in the care of the oldersurgical patient (geriatrician) and evidence-basedelder-friendly practices usedNurses as well as other allied health professionals arekey members of an ERAS team and should beinvolved in all stages of the design andimplementation of the ERAS pathwayConsideration should be given to the role of anemergency laparotomy program coordinator tofacilitate data collection, promote ERAS pathwayadherence and to provide a sense of continuity forpatients as they progress through levels of careMeasures to improve end-of-life care and reducenon-beneficial surgeryFuture emergency laparotomy studies and databasesshould include, when possible, a study of patientswho were eligible for surgery but did not undergosurgery (the ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ population) and died.Research should also explore international andcultural differences in refusal for surgeryLow StrongHigh StrongModerate StrongHigh StrongModerate StrongLow StrongLow WeakLow Strong123ERAS Item Part 3 (Part 1, 2 and 3 combined) Guideline Level ofEvidenceRecommendationGradePalliative care and end-of-life management Multidisciplinary discussions should take place beforesurgery where feasible for high-risk patients (highrisk defined by local criteria using a validated riskscoring system including a frailty evaluation whenappropriate), and after surgery on all eligiblepatients, as well as the ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ populationModerate StrongDiscussions between specialties and disciplines withpatients and carers regarding benefits and risksrelated to surgery, and the alternatives to surgeryshould be clearly documented. The patients¡¦ ¡¥¡¥Goalsof Care¡¦¡¦ should be included in this documentationLow StrongStaff should have training in palliative careconversations and end-of-life managementLow WeakAudit, Pathway Implementation, and Improvement8. (43) Audit Audit is a central component of ERAS. Having apathway with defined measurable componentsfacilitates improvement and allows comparison ofprocesses and outcomes between differentpractitioners and centersModerate Strong9. (44) Multidisciplinary Review of Outcomes Outcomes from emergency laparotomy should bereviewed on a regular basis. Review should bemultidisciplinary and multispecialty withperformance compared against evidence-basedstandards. A structured approach with standardnomenclature and thematic analysis is essential andshould be documentedModerate Strong10. (45) Development and implementation of anERAS protocol for emergency laparotomy at HealthSystem LevelDevelopment and implementation of an ERASprotocol for emergency laparotomy should involvepatients and carers, multidisciplinary stakeholders,and senior executives. Adequate time and fundingshould be allocated for implementation andplanning for long-term sustainabilityLow Strong11. (46) Initial implementation of high impactcomponentsLessons from large scale studies suggest animplementation focus on a small number of highimpact components from an ERAS pathwayLow Weak1886 Table 1 continuedinitially, may be more successfulWorld J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898dosages in their National/Hospital formularies beforeprescribing.Organization of surgical services for deliveryof emergency general surgeryOutcomes from patients undergoing emergency generalsurgery (EGS) and specifically EL have been shown tovary widely, with variation attributed to both patient fac-tors and system factors [7]. Modifiable system factorsinclude availability of intensive care beds, access to high-quality radiological services and involvement of seniorhealth-care professionals in the delivery of all stages ofcare [8¡V12]. Improved delivery of evidence-basedprocesses of care [13, 14] and provision of structuralmetrics [15] improve outcomes. Organization of services toensure key care components delivered reliably, by highlyskilled personnel, to all patients regardless of location andtype of presentation, is one of the main challenges toimproving care for these high-risk patients [8, 10, 15¡V17].Compared with standards of care for elective majorsurgical procedures, such as colorectal cancer, standardsfor EGS have been sparse. Over the last decade, awarenessof organizational needs has increased [18]. Some countrieshave defined standards for the organization of emergencysurgical services including the separation of elective andemergency surgical workload with the provision of sepa-rate teams and identification of key resources and facilitiesincluding the provision of postoperative intensive care beds123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 1887Fig. 1 A diagrammatic representation of the whole emergency laparotomy pathway, showing specific and contiguous pre-, intra- andpostoperative components. Updated and adapted from Peden CJ. Enhanced Recovery after Surgery: Emergency Laparotomy. In EnhancedRecovery After Surgery. Eds. Ljunqvist, Francis, Urman. 2020 Springer Nature, Switzerland[19¡V21]. Many health-care systems are seeing a steadyyearly increase in emergency surgical cases, especially inthe older population [22]. The centralization of EGS ser-vices and number of surgeries performed per annum by thesurgeon has been shown to improve outcomes [23], espe-cially in the geriatric population [22]. Different models ofcare have been shown to provide better outcomes for EGS,with one US study showing a 31% reduction in mortalitywith an acute care surgery service model compared with ageneral surgical service [24].RecommendationEvery country has a different health system structure,payment system, and geography which can either facilitateor pose barriers to optimal delivery of care. Implementingbest practice will require great change across most healthsystems. Strong consideration should be given to theestablishment of surgical and perioperative teams withexpertise dedicated to the care of EGS patients to optimizeoutcomes.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Strong.Experience of surgeon and anesthesiologistPatients undergoing EL are at high risk of morbidity andmortality. There is minimal margin for error, and there issome evidence to show that outcomes improve withexperienced surgical and anesthesia teams. A study of theAmerican College of Surgeons (ACS) National SurgicalQuality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database showedthat surgery led by trainee surgeons was independentlyassociated with increased intra- and postoperative events,wound, pulmonary, venous thromboembolic complications,and urinary tract infections [25]. However, 40% of thecases were appendectomy and 15% labeled as ¡¥¡¥other¡¦¡¦[25]. Other studies have shown an association with thepresence of a senior surgeon and anesthesiologist in theoperating room and improved outcomes [14, 26, 27].English National Health Service (NHS) organizations arenow incentivized to provide a senior surgeon and senioranesthesiologist for high-risk EL cases, including all casesin frail patients, by being paid a higher tariff for such apathway. Such an approach has been shown to be effectivein improving outcomes in other emergency surgical con-ditions such as patients with fractured neck of femur [28].In the USA, the ACS and the American Association forSurgery of Trauma (AAST) have recently introduced new1231888 resources and standards, including training requirementsfor surgeons at verified trauma/EGS centers [21].A recent large observational study from the UK NationalEmergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) database compar-ing trainees with consultant surgeon outcomes showed nodetrimental influence on mortality or return to theater¡Xalthough the level of experience of the operating surgeonwas not specified [29] nor the level of supervision. How-ever, the need for trainee exposure and management ofcomplex pathology and emergency situations should not beunderstated. The specialist expertise of the operating sur-geon appears to be important. Recent large studies reportan increase in mortality in patients operated on by surgeonswhose area of expertise was not in the area of the pathol-ogy, and for colorectal patients not operated on by spe-cialist colorectal surgeons there were lower rates oflaparoscopy and an increase in return to the operating room[30], although these results must be interpreted with cau-tion as factors such as the urgency of the procedure maynot have been fully accounted for. Another study showslower mortality and stoma formation if an emergencycolorectal resection is done by a colorectal subspecialist[31]. Solutions may include partnering across specialties inthe management of complex emergency surgical patients[32, 33]. However, the authors acknowledge the avail-ability of expertise will be dependent on the local health-care system.RecommendationPerioperative care for patients undergoing emergencygeneral surgery and specifically EL should be allocated tosurgeons, anesthesiologists and intensivists with expertisethat matches the needs of the patient. Strong considerationshould be given as to how such resources are made avail-able 24 h a day.Level of evidence: High.Recommendation grade: Strong.Ensuring the safe care of the emergencylaparotomy patient postoperativelyPostoperative levels of careWhile some patients will not require advanced organ sup-port, they may require enhanced or invasive monitoring andhigh staffing ratios, to prevent or rapidly manage compli-cations [17, 34]. Availability of intensive care unit (ICU)beds may vary from country to country and system to system.Based on low numbers of ICU beds in the UK, nationalguidelines [35] initially stated that all patients with a riskscore of C 10% predicted mortality should be admitted123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898directly to ICU postoperatively. This has now been reducedto a threshold of C 5% predicted mortality [36] in updatedguidelines, and includes all frail patients [37]. Using thisrevised threshold and a validated scoring system, plannedadmission to critical care for EL patients [38] has led toincreased ICU admissions [36, 39]. A NELA report [36]showed that of 24,823 patients in 2020, 63% went directly tocritical care (85% of those deemed high risk) and 5.4% wereadmitted to another ¡¥¡¥enhanced¡¦¡¦ area. For patients without adocumented risk score, only 51.7% went directly to criticalcare. These findings were similar in a subsequent report [40].Therefore, in the NELA data, patients who had their riskassessed formally before surgery were more likely to beadmitted to critical care than high-risk patients who did nothave a risk assessment. English NHS organizations are nowincentivized to risk score and then admit patients with apredicted mortality of C 5% directly to ICU by being paidthrough a best practice tariff.In the InCare randomized clinical trial (RCT), provisionof an intermediate postoperative level of care with continu-ous ECG monitoring, pulse oximetry and two hourlyobservations did not reduce mortality in EL patients [34].However, the trial was stopped early due to less thanexpected mortality in both patient groups (7.6% intermediatecare and 8.5% ward care 30-d mortality). In another study,extended stay in the postoperative anesthesia care unit(PACU) because of shortage of ICU beds increased mortalityin critically ill emergency surgery patients [41]. Delayedadmission to ICU following immediate postoperative dis-charge to a routine ward after surgery has been associatedwith increased mortality in larger studies [42, 43].A pragmatic approach may be required for a risk scorethreshold triggering admission based on local availability ofICU beds. Patients who cannot be admitted to a critical carebed, require proactive and ongoing observation, and localprotocols should be developed for this situation. The UK haspublished guidelines on the establishment of such units [44].RecommendationIn an ideal health system, all patients would be admitted toICU to have a high level of monitoring. A pragmaticapproach may be required for a risk score threshold trig-gering admission based on local availability of ICU beds.Patients who cannot be admitted to a critical care bedrequire proactive and ongoing observation, and local pro-tocols should be developed for this situation.Level of evidence: Moderate.Recommendation grade: Strong.World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 Ongoing monitoring and management of ongoingphysiological derangement, early detectionof complications and avoidance of failure to rescuePatients who have undergone EL remain at high risk ofcomplications in the days following surgery. Proactivedetection and management of physiological derangementand early management of complications need to continuewell into the postoperative period [17, 45, 46]. A smallprospective observational study [47] followed a cohort of144 patients who had undergone EL every day for 28 dayspostoperatively and found the highest incidence of mor-bidity on day three. Preoperative American Society ofAnesthesiologists (ASA) score and Portsmouth-Physio-logical and Operative Severity Score for the enUmerationof Mortality and morbidity (P-POSSUM) were signifi-cantly predictive of length of stay (LOS) and cumulativemorbidity. Sixty percent of patients experienced at leastone pulmonary, infectious or gastrointestinal complication,and complications were more common in patients over theage of 80 years. Although less common, cardiovascularand renal complications on any postoperative day werehighly predictive of mortality, other major studies of non-cardiac surgery have found that cardiovascular complica-tions are highly predictive of mortality [48, 49]. Acutekidney injury is also common in patients undergoing ELand predicts mortality [50, 51].Track and trigger physiological scoring systems such asthe early warning score alert to the development of acomplication [52]. Early warning scores (EWS), prior tothe incidence of the first major postoperative complication,were studied in 522 patients and predicted development ofa complication and its severity up to 3 days prior to diag-nosis of the complication [52]. A study of 6346 rapidresponse team (RRT) activations showed that the additionof EWS to other alerting criteria offered earlier detectionfor over half of the patients. However, use of EWS alonewas not sensitive enough and required use of other criteriasuch as ¡¥¡¥worried¡¦¡¦ [53]. A retrospective study of 32,527surgical inpatients found composite early warning scoringsystems such as the electronic Cardiac Arrest Triage score(eCART), Modified EWS (MEWS) and National EWS(NEWS) to be highly predictive of a major adverse event[54]. eCART was slightly more accurate but has 33 vari-ables and requires an electronic system, and MEWs andNEWs can be calculated from routine ward observationdata. Selection of a risk score for a hospital or health-caresystem should be guided by available variables, calculationmethod, and system resources. Once implemented, highlevels of adherence tied to specific levels of interventions,such as RRT activation, are necessary to allow the greatestpotential to improve outcomes [55].1889The failure to rescue (FTR) rate is the mortality rate forpatients who experience complications. In one major study,the difference between high and low mortality hospitalswas not determined by the incidence of the initial com-plication, but effective rescue of a patient once a compli-cation had occurred, although this study covered a range ofhigh-risk (high-risk defined as mortality [ 1%) generalsurgery and vascular surgery cases conditions, elective oremergency status was not specified [56]. FTR is modifiableby institutional factors such as higher nurse to patient ratios[57]. Retrospective studies have identified risk factors forFTR in EGS patients. A review of 329,183 patients [58]found a complication incidence of 21.2% in the 11,195patients who died, with 64% experiencing more than onecomplication. Infectious and pulmonary complicationswere the commonest index complications and were syn-ergistic in their potential to create a cascade of complica-tions, which without effective rescue resulted in death.Another retrospective review of over 23,000 patientsshowed that risk adjusted FTR was significantly higher inolder (C75 years) patients after a first pulmonary orinfectious complication, although not with a cardiovascularcomplication [59]. The FTR rate is higher in frail olderpopulations [60, 61]. The risk of a specific pattern of sec-ondary complications appears related to key index com-plications, for example deep space surgical site infection, isrelated to wound dehiscence [62]. Although the type ofindex complication is of note [59], it is action in the formof protocols to monitor, detect and act that reduce FTR andimprove outcomes [57]. Rapid response teams whichinclude an intensivist experienced in management ofpostoperative surgical patients have shown benefit [63].Prevention of a cascade of events from initial complicationto FTR provides a specific area for improvement in post-operative management of EL patients. Improvements insurgical mortality over the past 20 years for high-riskelective procedures in the Medicare database appear tohave been achieved through improvements in FTR [64].RecommendationLocal protocols including use of a physiological track andtrigger system to alert to deterioration and complicationdevelopment should be developed, tailored to local serviceprovision and infrastructure, to promote early interventionand prevent failure to rescue.Level of evidence: High.Recommendation grade: Strong.1231890 Multidisciplinary management of the EmergencyLaparotomy PatientComprehensive proactive care of the older surgicalpatientThe impact of age and frailty on outcomes after EL wasalso discussed in Part 1 of these guidelines [1]. Age alone issignificantly associated with poor outcomes for EL[27, 65], and many older patients are also frail, resulting ina lack of resilience in the face of a physiological insult[66¡V70]. Patients over 65 years of age should be screenedfor frailty using a validated tool [71]. Frailty is alsostrongly associated with an increased risk of delirium [72].In a study of outcomes at 12 months in older patients afterEL, the strongest predictors of mortality were frailty andincreased ASA status [73]. A study using the NSQIPdatabase showed a dose-dependent effect of frailty on FTR,as well as postoperative complications, reoperation, andall-cause mortality in older EGS patients [74]. An ERASapproach improved outcomes and reduced mortality inpatients over the age of 70 years [14, 75, 76]. Althoughmortality is improving for older patients undergoing EGS,for those that survive large numbers do not return to theirprevious level of independence [77].Involvement of a physician specialized in the care ofolder adults to co-manage these patients, and/or the use oftargeted interventions should occur as soon as possibleafter surgery (if not before) [70]. Recent studies andguidelines provide evidence that proactive screening forfrailty and comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) andmanagement, improves outcomes in EGS [70, 78¡V81], andspecifically for patients over 65 years of age who haveundergone EL [15, 82]. One major study [81] used aproactive approach for EGS patients over 65 yearsincluding integration of a geriatric assessment team, pro-motion of patient-oriented rehabilitation, and early dis-charge planning, and found a significant reduction inmortality, LOS and discharge to a higher level of care [81].Proactive management of frail patients may also decreaseoverall costs of care [83, 84]. At present, the evidenceindicates that older EL patients are not reliably assessed forfrailty nor co-managed with a care of the older-adult team[27].RecommendationPatients over 65 years of age should be assessed, and co-managed, as early as possible postoperatively by a physi-cian with expertise in the care of the older surgical patient123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898(geriatrician) and evidence-based elder-friendly practicesshould be used.Level of evidence: Moderate.Recommendation grade: Strong.Implications of ERAS for emergency laparotomyfor nursing practiceA key theme in successful implementation of ERASpathways is the importance of the multidisciplinary team.Although the role of the nurse is always mentioned, there islittle data examining the impact of the nursing role withinan ERAS context, and of nursing care of the emergencypatient group using an ERAS pathway [17]. Changes tonursing workload have been described in relation to elec-tive ERAS [85], and nursing workload is likely to increasewhen applying ERAS to emergency patients [86]. Nursingcare of this patient group is complicated by factors asso-ciated with EL such as increased frailty, pre-existingmedical conditions [68] and cardiovascular concernsincluding orthostatic intolerance in addition to the lack ofpre-habilitation due to the nature of presentation of thesepatients [17]. Nursing staff require a robust educationprogram to ensure understanding of the rationale behindERAS, including the need for early mobilization [87].Nursing ratios decrease as the patient recovers and movesthrough different levels of postoperative care. One study[88] illustrated patients¡¦ perspectives around step-downfrom critical care, interviews confirmed that the transitioncould be difficult, and patients felt insecure due to greaternursing workload and a perception of busier areas withfewer staff. In the UK specialist nursing roles focused onEL have evolved. NELA highlighted a need for continuitythrough transitions from critical care to general surgicalareas, and for an outreach program [89].Patients recovering from EL may experience issues withfatigue as well as pain [68] and consideration should begiven to highlighting pathway goals such as mobilizationtargets [90]. To facilitate ERAS goal attainment multidis-ciplinary collaboration particularly between physiotherapyand nursing teams, and staff availability over weekends andout-of-hours, should be considered [17, 91]. Patients havereported [92] that weekends can be a challenging timeduring their recovery. Many emergency patients needing astoma will not see a stoma nurse preoperatively and may goseveral days before seeing one postoperatively. Theabsence of preoperative stoma site marking, and emer-gency surgery have been identified as risk factors fordevelopment of a problematic stoma [93]. Much stomaspecialist nursing is a weekday, office hours service.World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 1891RecommendationNurses as well as other allied health professionals are keymembers of an ERAS team and should be involved in allstages of the design and implementation of the ERASpathway.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Strong.Consideration should be given to the role of an ELprogram coordinator to facilitate data collection, promoteERAS pathway adherence and to provide a sense of con-tinuity for patients as they progress through levels of care.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Weak.End-of-life care and non-beneficial surgeryNon-beneficial surgery and risk assessmentUp to one-third of older patients undergo surgery in the lastyear of life and 18% in the last month [94]. Most people donot wish to die in hospital and yet many will, often afterinvasive treatment such as surgery, which may be carriedout at the expense of patient dignity [95]. Patients, families,and the multidisciplinary surgical team all wish to avoidnon-beneficial surgery, a term which may be moreacceptable than value-laden terms such as ¡¥¡¥futile,¡¦¡¦ or¡¥¡¥inappropriate¡¦¡¦ [95]. The original definition of non-bene-ficial surgery was patients not surviving to hospital dis-charge after surgery; more recently, failure to survive to48 h [96], 3 days [97] and 5 days [98] has been used.However, these definitions are binary (alive or dead) andoverlook the principles of qualitative futility, which is ofgreat importance for shared decision-making discussionsbetween clinical teams and patients [99].Risk assessment as a tool to help with discussion of risksand potential outcomes with patient and family, as well asmultidisciplinary team (MDT) review before surgery forEL patients, and discussion about documentation of thepatient¡¦s goals of care preoperatively, are ERAS EL rec-ommendations and were discussed in Part 1 of thisguideline [1]. Discussions between specialties and disci-plines with patients and caregivers regarding benefits andrisks related to surgery, and the alternatives to surgeryshould be clearly documented as well as the patients¡¦¡¥¡¥Goals of Care¡¦¡¦ [100]. Most risk prediction tools estimatemortality at 30-days on a population basis and should onlybe applied to an individual patient as part of an overallassessment. The NELA risk prediction tool is calibrated forEL and has better calibration for those at a higher risk ofdeath than other common tools [101]. The PredictiveOptimal Trees in Emergency Surgery Risk (POTTER)calculator is accurate and user-friendly in predicting30-day mortality in patients undergoing EGS [102].Although frailty is independently associated with increasedperioperative mortality many earlier perioperative riskscores did not include frailty. A systematic review foundthat the NELA risk score combined with a frailty assess-ment and nutritional state gave a better prediction ofmortality [103], where preoperative risk assessment pre-dicts a particularly high-risk patient, and/or surgery isbeing considered in a patient with severe life-limitingdisease and/or poor quality of life, English guidelinessuggest shared decision-making should routinely include asenior surgeon, senior anesthetist, and senior intensivist aswell as other senior specialists (e.g., geriatricians) if pos-sible [37]. Formal risk assessment may not have occurredbefore surgery or findings at surgery may dramatically alterthe likely outcome. Therefore, some guidelines suggestfurther risk assessment at the end of surgery [35, 37]. If notdone prior to surgery, involvement of other health-careprofessionals such as a geriatrician or those with a long-standing relationship to the patient such as a primary carephysician, should occur.Postoperatively and in retrospect, there may be a situa-tion where an operation is deemed non-beneficial. Dis-cussion, at an MDT meeting to understand the reasons whythe decision to operate was made, is likely to be helpful forsurgical teams and future patients [104, 105]. Patients whodid not have surgery, ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ patients [106], should alsobe discussed at Morbidity and Mortality meetings. Inaddition to technical aspects, the conference should addresssurgical decision-making, multidisciplinary discussions,communication with the family and patient, and opportu-nities to improve patient and family experience, which mayrequire input from end-of-life teams. To increase emotionalsupport for trainees and help contextualize death in thisdifficult area, ¡¥¡¥end-of-life rounds¡¦¡¦ were developed formajor abdominal surgical patients in the ICU [107, 108].The ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ patient groupUntil recently little has been known about patients who hadindications for, but did not undergo, EL, termed the¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ patient group. McIlveen et al. [106] studiedpatients eligible for laparotomy in a single center over tenmonths- 32% of those admitted (100 patients) with anacute intra-abdominal problem did not undergo EL and 63died within 30-days. Poor documentation occurred in 16%of cases. The most common documented reasons for non-operative management were ¡¥¡¥poor fitness¡¦¡¦ and ¡¥¡¥not fit forsurgery.¡¦¡¦ Another recent single-center study from Den-mark reported contrasting results to McIlveen et al., withonly 8.3% of eligible patients not undergoing surgery[109]. The 12-week prospective Perth Emergency1231892 Laparotomy Audit found that, of patients who died with anacute surgical abdomen, 43% were eligible for surgery butdid not undergo EL [110]. More recently, in the Australiaand New Zealand Emergency Laparotomy Audit-QualityImprovement pilot, 26% of patients¡¦ eligible for surgerywho died did not undergo laparotomy. While case ascer-tainment was low, this is likely to be an underestimate[111]. Traditionally non-operative management has beenexcluded from surgical quality performance assessments.Wandling et al. showed the ease of including non-operativecare into surgical databases such as the ACS NSQIP toensure quality is improved for all surgical patients, ratherthan focusing only on those who receive an operation[112]. Beginning in October 2022, NSQIP will includesampling of non-operative EGS patients, which will greatlystrengthen the quality of research in this important EGSgroup.There appears to be cultural differences in the willing-ness to offer operative management [109, 113, 114] and apaucity of evidence on what a good outcome means forpatients, or medical professionals. A recent study tried tounderstand ¡¥¡¥recovery¡¦¡¦ for patients in four countries afterabdominal surgery [115]. Returning to normal habits androutines, resolution of symptoms and regaining indepen-dence were overriding themes, demonstrating that forpatients¡¦ recovery goes beyond conventional parameterssuch as the absence of complications [115]. Understandingand collecting quality of life measurements for up to a yearpost-surgery will shape the care we deliver for thesepatients.Future EL studies and databases should include, whenpossible, a study of patients who were eligible for surgery,but did not undergo surgery (the ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ population) anddied, to more fully represent the EGS population. Researchshould also explore international cultural differences inrefusal for surgery.There is a distinction between palliative care and carecapped short of surgery, as they are not the same. A patientadmitted for palliative care should ideally not be admittedunder a surgeon and should not have any active surgicaltreatment, but rather comfort treatment and symptommanagement. A patient admitted for non-operative caremay have very active treatment stopping short of surgery,and as McIlveen and colleagues showed [106] some of thisgroup will leave hospital alive.Palliative care and end-of-life managementIn the USA, almost two-thirds of older patients undergoingEL had baseline palliative care needs before surgery [116].Poor communication among surgeons, patients and theiradvocates, and systemic factors may lead to non-beneficialprocedures [117]. A common belief is that communication123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898about end-of-life issues increases patient distress [117, 118].However, specific interactions between physician andpatient usually occur with a physician who does not know thepatient, who may not address the patient¡¦s wishes, and fails toprovide enough information about prognosis to allowappropriate decisions [117, 118]. In addition, surgeons andanesthesiologists report a lack of confidence in talking topatients and their relatives about withdrawal of therapy,bereavement counseling, and palliative care [119]. Olderpatients undergoing emergency surgery often receive poorquality end-of-life care, leading to high rates of ICUadmissions and in-hospital death, with low rates of hospicereferral [118]. Poor communication is linked with adverseoutcomes including increased physical and emotional suf-fering, prolonged care with little improvement in quality oflife and poorer family satisfaction rates. When a patientundergoes non-beneficial treatment and the physician isaware but does not have the communication skills to preventit, moral injury can occur [120]. The ACS has prioritizedintegration of palliative care principles in surgical trainingsince 2003 [121] and the Royal College of Surgeons ofEngland have produced a guide to good practice [122].Ariadne Labs created the ¡¥¡¥Serious Illness ConversationGuide¡¦¡¦ [123] and supported a structured communicationframework for older patients requiring emergency surgery[118]. Such resources can help support clinicians and pro-vide guidance to better practice.Summary and recommendationsFuture EL studies and databases should include, whenpossible, a study of patients who were eligible for surgerybut did not undergo surgery (the ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ population) anddied. Research should also explore international culturaldifferences in refusal for surgery.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Strong.Multidisciplinary discussions should take place beforesurgery where feasible, for high-risk patients (high riskdefined by local criteria using a validated risk scoringsystem including a frailty evaluation when appropriate) andafter surgery on all eligible patients, as well as the¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ population.Level of Evidence; Moderate.Recommendation; grade Strong.Discussions between specialties and disciplines withpatients and caregivers regarding benefits and risks relatedto surgery, and the alternatives to surgery should be clearlydocumented. The patients¡¦ ¡¥¡¥Goals of Care¡¦¡¦ should beincluded in this documentation.Level of Evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Strong.World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 Fig. 2 from Aggarwal et al. [14]An illustrative example of an Emergency Laparotomy bundle,Staff should have training in palliative care conversa-tions and basic end-of-life management.Level of Evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Weak.Audit, pathway implementation and improvementAudit is a central component of ERAS [124]. Having apathway with defined measurable components facilitatesimprovement and allows comparison of processes andoutcomes between different practitioners and centers.Outcomes from EL and EGS have shown widespreadvariation ascribed to differences in patients, and variationsin individual hospital performance [10, 125, 126]. There isa lack of data on the impact of patient triage for surgery,and relatively little data on variation of patient selection,and assessment of non-beneficial surgery [97, 106]. Vari-ations in patients who undergo surgery can be accountedfor to a certain extent with risk adjustment, but collectionof all relevant data such as frailty and cognitive status is1893required. Variations in hospital performance are betteraddressed through quality improvement methodology.An important component for improving care is mortalityreview which is a standard part of any audit and qualityimprovement program. Regular multidisciplinary meetingsshould be held, including not only surgeons and anesthe-siologists but other relevant specialties such as radiologists,emergency department clinicians and geriatricians. Hospi-tal executives should on occasion be involved, as anyrequired system change may not be within the remit ofclinicians [127]. Using a structured approach to review alllaparotomy deaths can provide thematic insights into sys-tem, teamwork and communication issues and enablesharing and categorization of harm events, and develop-ment of areas for improvement. Such an approach tomortality review was mandated in the UK by the NationalQuality Board [128] and the use of standard nomenclatureso that thematic analysis can be performed and lessonslearnt across multiple specialties has also been promotedby the ACS [129].National data collection and reporting of performance ofkey metrics has been shown to be effective by NELA in theUK [130], and other countries have started similar projects[131, 132]. The way performance data are used, particu-larly timely and frequent feedback, has been associatedwith the effectiveness of the quality improvement program[133]. Attempts to implement too many ERAS componentsat once may be challenging, especially in the setting ofemergency surgery, and when time to work on improve-ment is limited [134]. Approaching implementation of asmaller number of high impact components, such as in anEL care bundle or pathway [14, 45, 75, 135] may be moreeffective, especially when standard ERAS elements arealready established (See Fig. 2 for an example of an ERASpathway Emergency Laparotomy Bundle). One studyshowed that good compliance with a specific EL carebundle decreased mortality, but when compliance fellmortality increased [13]. When the bundle was re-appliedwith high compliance, mortality decreased again. There-fore, consideration of how improvements will be sustainedshould occur at the planning phase [13]. Increased use ofquality improvement principles has been shown to aidimprovement of process delivery for EL [136]. Guidance tohelp quality improvement and implementation is available[130, 137]. Changing care delivery is challenging, a pro-tocol is not enough [138], real change needs not onlyclinical will and hard work, but cultural change and man-agement support [13, 127, 134, 139]. Program success isassociated with the adoption of evidence-based practices,assuring adequate resources are allocated for implementa-tion and long-term sustainability.1231894 RecommendationsAudit is a central component of ERAS. Having a pathwaywith defined measurable components facilitates improve-ment and allows comparison of processes and outcomesbetween different practitioners and centers.Level of evidence: Moderate.Recommendation grade: Strong.Outcomes from EL should be reviewed on a regularbasis. Review should be multidisciplinary and multispe-cialty with performance compared against evidence-basedstandards. A structured approach with standard nomencla-ture and thematic analysis is essential and should bedocumented.Level of evidence: Moderate.Recommendation grade: Strong.Development and implementation of an ERAS protocolfor EL should involve patients and caregivers, multidisci-plinary stakeholders, and senior executives. Adequate timeand funding should be allocated for implementation andplanning for long-term sustainability.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Strong.Lessons from large-scale studies suggest an implemen-tation focus on a small number of high-impact componentsinitially from an ERAS pathway may be more successful.Level of evidence: Low.Recommendation grade: Weak.ConclusionsThese guidelines present a summary of the current evi-dence base and recommendations for key components ofthe organizational aspects of an ERAS pathway for EL.The quality of evidence is low in certain areas and muchhas been extrapolated from elective ERAS guidelines andelective intra-abdominal surgery; therefore, many compo-nents may require further prospective validation. We haveaddressed some components of care outside of the usualremit of an elective ERAS pathway, such as aspects ofmanagement of the patient who may be at their end-of-life,as we believe these issues must be addressed to provide acomprehensive and holistic patient-centered EL pathway. Itis hoped that these organizational guidelines, paired withthe preoperative and intraoperative guidelines, will providea framework for improved management of patientsundergoing EL. While there will be benefit in implement-ing certain components of the pathway, the greatest gainshould be expected when organizational aspects of care areaddressed, and the whole pathway is considered, imple-mented, and audited for compliance. Excitingly, the123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898literature continues to grow in this area, and these guide-lines will be reviewed and updated when appropriate.Author contributions MS contributed to literature review, gradingof evidence, and drafted, edited, and made a substantial contributionto finalizing the manuscript. CP performed literature review, gradingof evidence, and made a substantial contribution to the writing of themanuscript. Both MS and CP organized the modified Delphi methodamong the authors. WBF and JK contributed to literature review,reference organization, and to writing the manuscript. DL, AB, CJ,CW, MH, NL, OL, IA, RU, RA, MG, FH, SH, JH, NF, CO, GA, SM,CS NQ, DH, ZC, EW, T Y-F and JD contributed to writing andrevising the paper, critical appraisal and grading of evidence.Funding Open access funding provided by SCELC, Statewide Cal-ifornia Electronic Library Consortium.DeclarationsConflicts of interest Dr. Scott has honoraria from and serves onadvisory boards of Baxter, Edwards Lifesciences, Deltex, Trevena,and Merck. He also receives travel reimbursement from these com-panies and is President of ERAS? USA. Dr. Peden has receivedconsultancy fees from the American College of Surgeons ImprovingCare and Surgical Recovery program, and from Medtronic for unre-lated work, and is Executive Medical Director for Clinical Quality forthe Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, USA. Dr. Lobo has receivedan unrestricted educational grant from B. Braun and speaker¡¦shonoraria from Abbott, Corza and Nestle ? for unrelated work. He is theScientific Chair of the ERAS? Society. Dr. Wu has nothing to dis-close. Dr. Hu ?bner has nothing to disclose. Dr. Lees has nothing todisclose. Dr. Urman has received research funding or fees fromMerck, Covidien/Medtronic, AcelRx and Pfizer outside the submittedwork, as well as federal funding from NIH, AHRQ and NSF. Dr.Aitken has nothing to disclose. Dr. Anderson has nothing to disclose.Dr. Grant has nothing to disclose. Dr. Hammarqvist has nothing todisclose. Dr. Hare has nothing to disclose. Dr. Havens has researchgrant funding from Johnson and Johnson outside the submitted work.Dr Johnston has nothing to disclose, Dr Ljungqvist is the Chairman ofthe ERAS? Society, founded and owns stock in Encare AB, and hasreceived honoraria for advice, lecturing including travel support fromNutricia, Fresenius-Kabi, Pharmacosmos, Encare AB, and lecturinghonoraria from Medtronic and BBraun outside the related work. DrLjungqvist previously held a now expired patent for a preoperativecarbohydrate drink. Angie Balfour¡XERAS? Coach, Encare?. Co-Director of The Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Society (UK)C.I.C. (not-for-profit organization¡XCompany No. 10932208). Norelevant conflict of interest related to this work.Dr. Ordon ?ez hasnothing to disclose. Dr. Kim has nothing to disclose. Dr. French hasnothing to disclose. Dr. Aggarwal has nothing to disclose. Dr. Quineyhas nothing to disclose. Dr. Holena has nothing to disclose. Dr.Cooper has funding from the National Institute on Aging and the JohnA. Hartford Foundation outside of the submitted work. Dr. Wick hasfunding from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality outsidethe submitted work. Dr. Bang Foss has nothing to disclose. Dr.Young-Fadok has nothing to disclose. Dr. Mohseni has nothing todisclose. Dr. Dhesi has nothing to disclose. Dr. Sharoky has nothingto disclose.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative CommonsAttribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, asWorld J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicateif changes were made. The images or other third party material in thisarticle are included in the article¡¦s Creative Commons licence, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is notincluded in the article¡¦s Creative Commons licence and your intendeduse is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitteduse, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.References1. Peden CJ, Aggarwal G, Aitken RJ et al (2021) Guidelines forperioperative care for emergency laparotomy enhanced recoveryafter surgery (ERAS) society recommendations: part 1-preop-erative: diagnosis, rapid assessment and optimization. World JSurg 45:1272¡V12902. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R et al (2008) Going from evi-dence to recommendations. BMJ 336:1049¡V10513. Brown BB (1968) Delphi process: a methodology used for theelicitation of opinions of experts. RAND Corporation, SantaMonica, CA4. Brindle M, Nelson G, Lobo DN et al (2020) Recommendationsfrom the ERAS? Society for standards for the development ofenhanced recovery after surgery guidelines. BJS Open4:157¡V1635. NELA Project Team (2017) Audit inclusion and exclusion cri-teria: NELA inclusion criteria. In: National emergency laparo-tomy audit. https://www.nela.org.uk/Criteria. Accessed 20 Aug20196. American College of Surgeons (2018) User guide for the 2017ACS NSQIP participant use data file7. Havens JM, Peetz AB, Do WS et al (2015) The excess morbidityand mortality of emergency general surgery. J Trauma AcuteCare Surg 78:306¡V3118. Daniel VT, Ingraham AM, Khubchandani JA et al (2019)Variations in the delivery of emergency general surgery care inthe era of acute care surgery. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf45:14¡V239. Ingraham A, Nathens A, Peitzman A et al (2017) Assessment ofemergency general surgery care based on formally developedquality indicators. Surgery 162:397¡V40710. Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Raval MV et al (2011) Comparisonof hospital performance in emergency versus elective generalsurgery operations at 198 hospitals. J Am Coll Surg 212:20-28.e111. Saunders DI, Murray D, Pichel AC et al (2012) Variations inmortality after emergency laparotomy: the first report of the UKEmergency Laparotomy Network. Br J Anaesth 109:368¡V37512. Chana P, Joy M, Casey N et al (2017) Cohort analysis of out-comes in 69 490 emergency general surgical admissions acrossan international benchmarking collaborative. BMJ Open7:e01448413. Jordan LC, Cook TM, Cook S-C et al (2020) Sustaining bettercare for patients undergoing emergency laparotomy. Anaesthe-sia 75:1321¡V133014. Aggarwal G, Peden CJ, Mohammed MA et al (2019) Evaluationof the collaborative use of an evidence-based care bundle inemergency laparotomy. JAMA Surg 154:e19014515. Oliver CM, Bassett MG, Poulton TE et al (2018) Organisationalfactors and mortality after an emergency laparotomy: multilevelanalysis of 39 903 National emergency laparotomy auditpatients. Br J Anaesth 121:1346¡V1356189516. Symons NRA, Moorthy K, Vincent CA, London SurgicalResearch Group (2016) Reliability in the process of care duringemergency general surgical admission: a prospective cohortstudy. Int J Surg 32:143¡V14917. Foss NB, Kehlet H (2020) Challenges in optimising recoveryafter emergency laparotomy. Anaesthesia 75(Suppl 1):e83¡Ve8918. Coccolini F, Kluger Y, Ansaloni L et al (2018) WSES world-wide emergency general surgery formation and evaluation pro-ject. World J Emerg Surg 13:1319. Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland and RoyalCollege of Surgeons of England (2014) Commissioning guide:emergency general surgery (acute abdominal pain) https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/library-and-publications/rcs-publications/docs/emergency-general-guide/Accessed Jan 202320. Royal College of Surgeons (2011) Emergency surgery: stan-dards for unscheduled care. https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/library-and-publications/rcs-publications/docs/emergency-surgery-standards-for-unscheduled-care/21. American College of Surgeons (2022) Emergency general sur-gery verification program. https://www.facs.org/quality-programs/accreditation-and-verification/emergency-general-surgery/. Accessed 9 Jan 202322. Mehta A, Dultz LA, Joseph B et al (2018) Emergency generalsurgery in geriatric patients: a statewide analysis of surgeon andhospital volume with outcomes. J Trauma Acute Care Surg84:864¡V87523. Ogola GO, Crandall ML, Richter KM, Shafi S (2018) High-volume hospitals are associated with lower mortality amonghigh-risk emergency general surgery patients. J Trauma AcuteCare Surg 85:560¡V56524. To KB, Kamdar NS, Patil P et al (2019) Acute care surgerymodel and outcomes in emergency general surgery. J Am CollSurg 228:21-28.e725. Kasotakis G, Lakha A, Sarkar B et al (2014) Trainee partici-pation is associated with adverse outcomes in emergency gen-eral surgery: an analysis of the National Surgical QualityImprovement Program database. Ann Surg 260:483¡V49026. NELA Project Team (2018) Fourth patient report of the NationalEmergency Laparotomy Audit. RCoA London https://www.nela.org.uk/downloads/The%20Fourth%20Patient%20Report%20of%20the%20National%20Emergency%20Laparotomy%20Audit%202018%20-%20Full%20Patient%20Report.pdfAccessed Jan 202327. NELA Project Team (2019) Fifth patient report of the NationalEmergency Laparotomy Audit https://www.nela.org.uk/downloads/The%20Fifth%20Patient%20Report%20of%20the%20NELA%202019%20-%20Full%20Patient%20Report.pdfAccessed Jan 202328. Whitaker SR, Nisar S, Scally AJ, Radcliffe GS (2019) Doesachieving the ¡¥¡¥Best Practice Tariff¡¦¡¦ criteria for fractured neckof femur patients improve one year outcomes? Injury50:1358¡V136329. Boyd-Carson H, Doleman B, Lockwood S et al (2020) Trainee-led emergency laparotomy operating. Br J Surg 107:1289¡V129830. Brown LR, McLean RC, Perren D et al (2019) Evaluating theeffects of surgical subspecialisation on patient outcomes fol-lowing emergency laparotomy: a retrospective cohort study. IntJ Surg 62:67¡V7331. Young J, Brown LR, Thomas CLG et al (2021) The impact ofsurgical subspecialization on patient outcomes following emer-gency colorectal resections in the north of England: a retro-spective cohort study. Colorectal Dis 23:284¡V29732. Boyd-Carson H, Doleman B, Herrod PJJ et al (2019) Associa-tion between surgeon special interest and mortality after emer-gency laparotomy. Br J Surg 106:940¡V9481231896 33. Hallam S, Bickley M, Phelan L et al (2020) Does declaredsurgeon specialist interest influence the outcome of emergencylaparotomy? Ann R Coll Surg Engl 102:437¡V44134. Vester-Andersen M, Waldau T, Wetterslev J et al (2015) Ran-domized multicentre feasibility trial of intermediate care versusstandard ward care after emergency abdominal surgery (InCaretrial). Br J Surg 102:619¡V62935. The Royal College of Surgeons and Department of Health(2011) The higher risk general surgical patient: towardsimproved care for a forgotten group https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/library-and-publications/rcs-publications/docs/the-higher-risk-general-surgical-patient/ Accessed Jan 202336. NELA Project Team (2020) Sixth patient report of the NationalEmergency Laparotomy Audit. https://www.hqip.org.uk/resource/national-emergency-laparotomy-audit-sixth-patient-report/. Accessed 20 Feb 202137. Update to the high-risk surgical patient released by RCS Eng-land. https://www.nela.org.uk/RCS-Update-The-High-Risk-Surgical-Patient-Released. Accessed 20 Nov 202238. Eugene N, Oliver CM, Bassett MG et al (2018) Developmentand internal validation of a novel risk adjustment model foradult patients undergoing emergency laparotomy surgery: theNational Emergency Laparotomy Audit risk model. Br JAnaesth 121:739¡V74839. STARSurg Collaborative, (2019) Critical care usage after majorgastrointestinal and liver surgery: a prospective, multicentreobservational study. Br J Anaesth 122:42¡V5040. NELA Project Team (2021) Seventh patient report. https://www.nela.org.uk/Seventh-Patient-Report. Accessed 13 Mar 202241. Bing-Hua YU (2014) Delayed admission to intensive care unitfor critically surgical patients is associated with increasedmortality. Am J Surg 208:268¡V27442. Pearse RM, Moreno RP, Bauer P et al (2012) Mortality aftersurgery in Europe: a 7 day cohort study. Lancet 380:1059¡V106543. Gillies MA, Ghaffar S, Harrison E et al (2019) The associationbetween ICU admission and emergency hospital readmissionfollowing emergency general surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med20:316¡V32644. Mudford L Enhanced perioperative care. In: Centre for periop-erative care. https://www.cpoc.org.uk/guidelines-resources-guidelines/enhanced-perioperative-care. Accessed 10 Jan 202345. Tengberg LT, Bay-Nielsen M, Bisgaard T et al (2017) Mul-tidisciplinary perioperative protocol in patients undergoingacute high-risk abdominal surgery. Br J Surg 104:463¡V47146. Khuri SF, Henderson WG, DePalma RG et al (2005) Determi-nants of long-term survival after major surgery and the adverseeffect of postoperative complications. Ann Surg 242:326¡V34147. Howes TE, Cook TM, Corrigan LJ et al (2015) Postoperativemorbidity survey, mortality and length of stay following emer-gency laparotomy. Anaesthesia 70:1020¡V102748. Writing Committee for the VISION Study Investigators, Dev-ereaux PJ, Biccard BM et al (2017) Association of postoperativehigh-sensitivity troponin levels with myocardial injury and30-day mortality among patients undergoing noncardiac sur-gery. JAMA 317:1642¡V165149. Zimmerman AM, Marwaha J, Nunez H et al (2016) Preoperativemyocardial injury as a predictor of mortality in emergencygeneral surgery: an analysis using the American College ofSurgeons NSQIP Database. J Am Coll Surg 223:381¡V38650. Briggs A, Havens JM, Salim A, Christopher KB (2018) Acutekidney injury predicts mortality in emergency general surgerypatients. Am J Surg 216:420¡V42651. Doyle JF, Sarnowski A, Saadat F et al (2019) Does the imple-mentation of a quality improvement care bundle reduce theincidence of acute kidney injury in patients undergoing emer-gency laparotomy? J Clin Med Res 8:1265123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V189852. Hollis RH, Graham LA, Lazenby JP et al (2016) A role for theearly warning score in early identification of critical postoper-ative complications. Ann Surg 263:918¡V92353. Reardon PM, Seely AJE, Fernando SM et al (2022) Can earlywarning systems enhance detection of high risk patients by rapidresponse teams? J Intensive Care Med 36:542¡V54954. Bartkowiak B, Snyder AM, Benjamin A et al (2019) Validatingthe electronic cardiac arrest risk triage (eCART) score for riskstratification of surgical inpatients in the postoperative setting:retrospective cohort study. Ann Surg 269:1059¡V106355. Churpek MM, Yuen TC, Edelson DP (2013) Risk stratificationof hospitalized patients on the wards. Chest 143:1758¡V176556. Ghaferi AA, Birkmeyer JD, Dimick JB (2009) Variation inhospital mortality associated with inpatient surgery. N Engl JMed 361:1368¡V137557. Hatchimonji JS, Kaufman EJ, Sharoky CE et al (2019) Failure torescue in surgical patients: a review for acute care surgeons.J Trauma Acute Care Surg 87:699¡V70658. Hatchimonji JS, Swendiman RA, Kaufman EJ et al (2020)Multiple complications in emergency surgery: identifying riskfactors for failure-to-rescue. Am Surg 86:787¡V79559. Sheetz KH, Krell RW, Englesbe MJ et al (2014) The importanceof the first complication: understanding failure to rescue afteremergent surgery in the elderly. J Am Coll Surg 219:365¡V37060. Shah R, Attwood K, Arya S et al (2018) Association of frailtywith failure to rescue after low-risk and high-risk inpatientsurgery. JAMA Surg 153:e18021461. Khan M, Jehan F, Zeeshan M et al (2019) Failure to rescue afteremergency general surgery in geriatric patients: does frailtymatter? J Surg Res 233:397¡V40262. Wakeam E, Hyder JA, Jiang W et al (2015) Risk and patterns ofsecondary complications in surgical inpatients. JAMA Surg150:65¡V7363. Wakeam E, Asafu-Adjei D, Ashley SW et al (2014) The asso-ciation of intensivists with failure-to-rescue rates in outlierhospitals: results of a national survey of intensive care unitorganizational characteristics. J Crit Care 29:930¡V93564. Fry BT, Smith ME, Thumma JR et al (2020) Ten-year trends insurgical mortality, complications, and failure to rescue inmedicare beneficiaries. Ann Surg 271:855¡V86165. Cooper Z, Mitchell SL, Gorges RJ et al (2015) Predictors ofmortality up to 1 year after emergency major abdominal surgeryin older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 63:2572¡V257966. McIsaac DI, Moloo H, Bryson GL, van Walraven C (2017) Theassociation of frailty with outcomes and resource use afteremergency general surgery: a population-based cohort study.Anesth Analg 124:1653¡V166167. Akyar S, Armenia SJ, Ratnani P, Merchant AM (2018) Theimpact of frailty on postoperative cardiopulmonary complica-tions in the emergency general surgery population. Surg J (N Y)4:e66¡Ve7768. Parmar KL, Law J, Carter B et al (2021) Frailty in older patientsundergoing emergency laparotomy: results from the UK obser-vational emergency laparotomy and frailty (ELF) study. AnnSurg 273:709¡V71869. Tan HL, Chia STX, Nadkarni NV et al (2019) Frailty andfunctional decline after emergency abdominal surgery in theelderly: a prospective cohort study. World J Emerg Surg 14:6270. Centre for Perioperative Care (2021) Perioperative care ofpeople living with frailty. In: Centre for perioperative care.https://cpoc.org.uk/guidelines-resources-guidelines/perioperative-care-people-living-frailty. Accessed 14 Mar 202271. Aucoin SD, Hao M, Sohi R et al (2020) Accuracy and feasibilityof clinically applied frailty instruments before surgery: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Anesthesiology 133:78¡V95World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898 72. Zhang X-M, Jiao J, Xie X-H, Wu X-J (2021) The associationbetween frailty and delirium among hospitalized patients: anupdated meta-analysis. J Am Med Dir Assoc 22:527¡V53473. Vilches-Moraga A, Rowley M, Fox J et al (2020) Emergencylaparotomy in the older patient: factors predictive of 12-monthmortality¡XSalford-POPS-GS. An observational study. AgingClin Exp Res 32:2367¡V237374. Kenawy DM, Renshaw SM, George E et al (2021) Increasingfrailty in geriatric emergency general surgery: a cause for con-cern. J Surg Res 266:320¡V32775. Huddart S, Peden CJ, Swart M et al (2015) Use of a pathwayquality improvement care bundle to reduce mortality afteremergency laparotomy. Br J Surg 102:57¡V6676. Paduraru M, Ponchietti L, Casas IM et al (2017) Enhancedrecovery after surgery (ERAS) - the evidence in geriatricemergency surgery: a systematic review. Chirurgia 112:546¡V55777. Rubin DS, Huisingh-Scheetz M, Ferguson MK et al (2021) U.S.trends in elective and emergent major abdominal surgical pro-cedures from 2002 to 2014 in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc69:2220¡V223078. Lee KC, Streid J, Sturgeon D et al (2020) The impact of frailtyon long-term patient-oriented outcomes after emergency generalsurgery: a retrospective cohort study. J Am Geriatr Soc68:1037¡V104379. Eamer G, Taheri A, Chen SS et al (2018) Comprehensivegeriatric assessment for older people admitted to a surgicalservice. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD01248580. Engelhardt KE, Reuter Q, Liu J et al (2018) Frailty screeningand a frailty pathway decrease length of stay, loss of indepen-dence, and 30-day readmission rates in frail geriatric trauma andemergency general surgery patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg85:167¡V17381. Khadaroo RG, Warkentin LM, Wagg AS et al (2020) Clinicaleffectiveness of the elder-friendly approaches to the surgicalenvironment initiative in emergency general surgery. JAMASurg 155:e19602182. Aitken RM, Partridge JSL, Oliver CM et al (2020) Olderpatients undergoing emergency laparotomy: observations fromthe National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) years 1¡V4.Age Ageing 49:656¡V66383. Eamer GJ, Clement F, Holroyd-Leduc J et al (2019) Frailtypredicts increased costs in emergent general surgery patients: aprospective cohort cost analysis. Surgery 166:82¡V8784. Hofmeister M, Khadaroo RG, Holroyd-Leduc J et al (2020)Cost-effectiveness analysis of the elder-friendly approaches tothe surgical environment (EASE) intervention for emergencyabdominal surgical care of adults aged 65 years and older.JAMA Netw Open 3:e20203485. Hu ?bner M, Addor V, Slieker J et al (2015) The impact of anenhanced recovery pathway on nursing workload: a retrospec-tive cohort study. Int J Surg 24:45¡V5086. Lohsiriwat V, Jitmungngan R (2019) Enhanced recovery aftersurgery in emergency colorectal surgery: review of literatureand current practices. World J Gastrointest Surg 11:41¡V5287. Balfour A, Burch J, Fecher-Jones I, Carter FJ (2019) Under-standing the benefits and implications of enhanced recoveryafter surgery. Nurs Stand 34:70¡V7588. Thomsen T, Vester-Andersen M, Nielsen MV et al (2015)Patients¡¦ experiences of postoperative intermediate care andstandard surgical ward care after emergency abdominal surgery:a qualitative sub-study of the Incare trial. J Clin Nurs24:1280¡V128889. Stephenson J (2019) Nurses developing new roles to improvelaparotomy care. In: Nursing times. https://www.nursingtimes.net/news/research-and-innovation/nurses-developing-new-roles-1897to-improve-laparotomy-care/7028566.article. Accessed 31 Mar202190. Poulton T, Murray D, National Emergency Laparotomy Audit(NELA) project team (2019) Pre-optimisation of patientsundergoing emergency laparotomy: a review of best practice.Anaesthesia 74(Suppl 1):100¡V10791. Boden I, Sullivan K, Hackett C et al (2018) ICEAGE (Incidenceof Complications following Emergency Abdominal surgery: GetExercising): study protocol of a pragmatic, multicentre, ran-domised controlled trial testing physiotherapy for the preventionof complications and improved physical recovery after emer-gency abdominal surgery. World J Emerg Surg 13:2992. Law J, Welch C, Javanmard-Emamghissi H et al (2020) Deci-sion-making for older patients undergoing emergency laparo-tomy: defining patient and clinician values and priorities.Colorectal Dis 22:1694¡V170393. Parmar KL, Zammit M, Smith A et al (2011) A prospectiveaudit of early stoma complications in colorectal cancer treatmentthroughout the Greater Manchester and Cheshire colorectalcancer network. Colorectal Dis 13:935¡V93894. Kwok AC, Semel ME, Lipsitz SR et al (2011) The intensity andvariation of surgical care at the end of life: a retrospective cohortstudy. Lancet 378:1408¡V141395. Cardona-Morrell M, Kim J, Turner RM et al (2016) Non-ben-eficial treatments in hospital at the end of life: a systematicreview on extent of the problem. Int J Qual Health Care28:456¡V46996. Chiu AS, Jean RA, Resio B, Pei KY (2019) Early postoperativedeath in extreme-risk patients: a perspective on surgical futility.Surgery 166:380¡V38597. Aggarwal G, Broughton KJ, Williams LJ et al (2020) Earlypostoperative death in patients undergoing emergency high-risksurgery: towards a better understanding of patients for whomsurgery may not be beneficial. J Clin Med 9:128898. DeWane MP, Davis KA, Schuster KM et al (2019) Rethinkingour definition of operative success: predicting early mortalityafter emergency general surgery colon resection. Trauma SurgAcute Care Open 4:e00024499. Javanmard-Emamghissi H, Lockwood S, Hare S et al (2022)The false dichotomy of surgical futility in the emergencylaparotomy setting: scoping review. BJS Open 6:zrac023100. Roberts GP, Levy N, Lobo DN (2021) Patient-centric goal-ori-ented perioperative care. Br J Anaesth 126:559¡V564101. Eliezer DD, Holmes M, Sullivan G et al (2020) High-riskemergency laparotomy in Australia: comparing NELA,P-POSSUM, and ACS-NSQIP calculators. J Surg Res246:300¡V304102. El Hechi MW, Maurer LR, Levine J et al (2021) Validation ofthe artificial intelligence-based predictive optimal trees inemergency surgery risk (POTTER) calculator in emergencygeneral surgery and emergency laparotomy patients. J Am CollSurg 232:912-919.e1103. Barazanchi A, Bhat S, Palmer-Neels K et al (2020) Evaluatingand improving current risk prediction tools in emergencylaparotomy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 89:382¡V387104. Foss NB (2020) Emergency laparotomy success ¡V optimisationor triage? Anaesthesia 75:1289¡V1292105. Sroka R, Gabriel EM, Al-Hadidi D et al (2019) A novel anes-thesiologist-led multidisciplinary model for evaluating high-risksurgical patients at a comprehensive cancer center. J HealthcRisk Manag 38:12¡V23106. McIlveen EC, Wright E, Shaw M et al (2020) A prospectivecohort study characterising patients declined emergencylaparotomy: survival in the ¡¥¡¥NoLap¡¦¡¦ population. Anaesthesia75:54¡V621231898 107. Cooper Z, Lilley EJ, Bollens-Lund E et al (2018) High burden ofpalliative care needs of older adults during emergency majorabdominal surgery. J Am Geriatr Soc 66:2072¡V2078108. Khot S, Billings M, Owens D, Longstreth WT Jr (2011) Copingwith death and dying on a neurology inpatient service: deathrounds as an educational initiative for residents. Arch Neurol68:1395¡V1397109. Ebrahim M, Lauritsen ML, Cihoric M et al (2023) Triage andoutcomes for a whole cohort of patients presenting for majoremergency abdominal surgery including the No-LAP popula-tion: a prospective single-center observational study. Eur JTrauma Emerg Surg 49(1):253¡V260110. Broughton KJ, Aldridge O, Pradhan S, Aitken RJ (2017) ThePerth emergency laparotomy audit. ANZ J Surg 87:893¡V897111. The ANZELA-QI Working Party, Aitken RJ, Griffiths B et al(2021) Two-year outcomes from the Australian and New Zeal-and emergency laparotomy audit-quality improvement pilotstudy. ANZ J Surg 91:2575¡V2582112. Wandling MW, Ko CY, Bankey PE et al (2017) Expanding thescope of quality measurement in surgery to include nonoperativecare: results from the American College of Surgeons NationalSurgical Quality Improvement Program emergency generalsurgery pilot. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 83:837¡V845113. Markar SR, Vidal-Diez A, Patel K et al (2019) Comparison ofsurgical intervention and mortality for seven surgical emergen-cies in England and the United States. Ann Surg 270:806¡V812114. Markar SR, Vidal-Diez A, Holt PJ et al (2021) An internationalcomparison of the management of gastrointestinal surgicalemergencies in Octogenarians-England versus United States: anational population-based cohort study. Ann Surg 273:924¡V932115. Rajabiyazdi F, Alam R, Pal A et al (2021) Understanding themeaning of recovery to patients undergoing abdominal surgery.JAMA Surg 156:758¡V765116. Lilley EJ, Cooper Z (2016) The high burden of palliative careneeds among older emergency general surgery patients. J PalliatMed 19:352¡V353117. Cooper Z, Courtwright A, Karlage A et al (2014) Pitfalls incommunication that lead to nonbeneficial emergency surgery inelderly patients with serious illness: description of the problemand elements of a solution. Ann Surg 260:949¡V957118. Cooper Z, Koritsanszky LA, Cauley CE et al (2016) Recom-mendations for best communication practices to facilitate goal-concordant care for seriously ill older patients with emergencysurgical conditions. Ann Surg 263:1¡V6119. Bakke KE, Miranda SP, Castillo-Angeles M et al (2018)Training surgeons and anesthesiologists to facilitate end-of-lifeconversations with patients and families: a systematic review ofexisting educational models. J Surg Educ 75:702¡V721120. Dean W, Talbot S, Dean A (2019) Reframing clinician distress:moral injury not burnout. Fed Pract 36:400¡V402121. Surgeons Palliative Care Workgroup (2003) Office of promotingexcellence in end-of-life care: surgeon¡¦s palliative care work-group report from the field. J Am Coll Surg 197:661¡V686122. sitecore\ Caring for patients nearing the end of life. In: RoyalCollege of Surgeons. https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/standards-and-research/standards-and-guidance/good-practice-guides/end-of-life-care/. Accessed 6 Feb 2022123. Bernacki RE, Block SD, American College of Physicians HighValue Care Task Force (2014) Communication about seriousillness care goals: a review and synthesis of best practices.JAMA Intern Med 174:1994¡V2003123World J Surg (2023) 47:1881¡V1898124. Francis NK, Walker T, Carter F et al (2018) Consensus ontraining and implementation of enhanced recovery after surgery:a Delphi study. World J Surg 42:1919¡V1928125. Columbus AB, Morris MA, Lilley EJ et al (2018) Critical dif-ferences between elective and emergency surgery: identifyingdomains for quality improvement in emergency general surgery.Surgery 163:832¡V838126. Ingraham AM, Ayturk MD, Kiefe CI, Santry HP (2019)Adherence to 20 emergency general surgery best practices:results of a national survey. Ann Surg 270:270¡V280127. Stephens TJ, Beckingham IJ, Bamber JR, Peden CJ (2022) Whatinfluences the effectiveness of quality improvement in periop-erative care: learning from large multicenter studies in emer-gency general surgery? Anesth Analg 134:559¡V563128. (2018) Mortality toolkit: Implementing structured judgementreviews for improvement. In: RCP London. https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/guidelines-policy/mortality-toolkit-implementing-structured-judgement-reviews-improvement. Accessed 10 Feb 2022129. American College of Surgeons. Committee on Trauma (1990)Resources for optimal care of the injured patient. AmericanCollege of Surgeons, Committee on Trauma130. The National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA). https://www.nela.org.uk/. Accessed 20 Jun 2019131. ANZ Emergency Laparotomy Audit ¡V Quality improvement.https://www.surgeons.org/research-audit/morbidity-audits/morbidity-audits-managed-by-racs/anz-emergency-laparotomy-audit-quality-improvement. Accessed 20 Jun 2020132. Liljendahl MS, Go ?genur I, Thygesen LC (2020) Emergencylaparotomy in Denmark: a nationwide descriptive study. World JSurg 44:2976¡V2981133. Campbell DA Jr, Englesbe MJ, Kubus JJ et al (2010) Acceler-ating the pace of surgical quality improvement: the power ofhospital collaboration. Arch Surg 145:985¡V991134. Peden CJ, Stephens T, Martin G et al (2019) Effectiveness of anational quality improvement programme to improve survivalafter emergency abdominal surgery (EPOCH): a stepped-wedgecluster-randomised trial. Lancet 393:2213¡V2221135. M?ller MH, Adamsen S, Thomsen RW et al (2011) Multicentretrial of a perioperative protocol to reduce mortality in patientswith peptic ulcer perforation. Br J Surg 98:802¡V810136. Stephens TJ, Peden CJ, Haines R et al (2019) Hospital-levelevaluation of the effect of a national quality improvement pro-gramme: time-series analysis of registry data. BMJ Qual Saf29:623¡V635137. Institute for Healthcare Improvement How to Improve. http://www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/HowtoImprove/default.aspx.Accessed 5 Jul 2018138. Maessen J, Dejong CHC, Hausel J et al (2007) A protocol is notenough to implement an enhanced recovery programme forcolorectal resection. Br J Surg 94:224¡V231139. Stephens TJ, Peden CJ, Pearse RM et al (2018) Improving careat scale: process evaluation of a multi-component qualityimprovement intervention to reduce mortality after emergencyabdominal surgery (EPOCH trial). Implement Sci 13:142Publisher¡¦s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard tojurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.