    A framework for perioperative care for lower extremity    vascular bypasses: a Consensus Statement by the    Enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) Society and    Society for Vascular Surgery    Katharine L. McGinigle, MD, MPH,a Emily L. Spangler, MD, MS,b Katie Ayyash, MBChB, BSc, FRCA, MSc,c    Shipra Arya, MD, MS,d Alberto M. Settembrini, MD,e Merin M. Thomas, PA-C,f    Kate E. Dell, DNP, AGACNP-BC,g    Iris J. Swiderski, DHSc, MPAS, PA-C,h Mark G. Davies, MD, PhD, MBA,i Carlo Setacci, MD,j    Richard D. Urman, MD, MBA,k Simon J. Howell, MA, MRCP, FRCA, MSc, MD,l Joy Garg, MD,m    Olle Ljungvist, MD, PhD,n and Hans D. de Boer, MD, PhD, BC,o Chapel Hill, NC; Birmingham, AL; Palo Alto, and San    Leandro, CA; New Hyde Park, NY; Lafayette, IN; Melbourne, FL; San Antonio, TX; Boston, MA; York, and Leeds, United    Kingdom; Milan, and Siena, Italy; Orebro, Sweden; and Groningen, the Netherlands    ABSTRACT    The Society for Vascular Surgery and the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society formally collaborated and    elected an international, multi-disciplinary panel of experts to review the literature and provide evidence-based suggestions for coordinated perioperative care for patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass surgery for peripheral artery    disease. Structured around the ERAS core elements, 26 suggestions were made and organized into preadmission, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative sections. (J Vasc Surg 2023;-:1-21.)    Keywords: Analgesia and anesthesia; Enhanced recovery after surgery; Evidence-based recommendations; Guidelines;    Infrainguinal bypass surgery; Perioperative care; Peripheral artery disease    TABLE OF CONTENTS    METHODS ..................................................................................... 2    Formation of the Guideline Development Group    and selection of topics ........................................................... 2    Literature search strategy .................................................... 2    Quality assessment, data analyses, and    consensus generation ............................................................. 3    RESULTS ....................................................................................... 3    PREADMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS ........................ 3    1. Patient information, education, and    counseling ........................................................................................ 3    2. Assessment and optimization: (a) nutritional    deficiency; (b) anemia screening; (c) frailty; (d)    delirium risk; (e) psychosocial concerns, and (f)    tobacco and alcohol overconsumption ................... 3    From the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hilla    ; the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birminghamb    ; the Department    of Perioperative Medicine (Merit), York and Scarborough Teaching Hospitals    NHS Foundation Trust, Yorkc    ; the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine,    Stanford University, Palo Altod; the Fondazione IRCCS Ca・ Granda Policlinico,    Milane    ; the Lenox Hill Hospital, Northwell Health, New Hyde Parkf    ; the Ascension Medical Group, Lafayetteg    ; the Medical Associates of Brevard, Melbourneh    ; the Department of Surgery, Joe R. & Teresa Lozano Long School of    Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonioi    ; the    Department of Surgery Surgery, University of Siena, Sienaj    ; the Department    of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women・s    Hospital, Bostonk    ; the Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St. James・s, University of Leeds, Leedsl    ; the Department of Vascular Surgery, Kaiser Permanente San Leandro, San Leandrom; the Department of Surgery, Orebro    University, Orebron    ; and the Department of Anesthesiology, Pain Medicine,    and Procedure Sedation and Analgesia, Martini General Hospital Groningen,    Groningen.o    Author conflict of interest: H.d.B. reports Chairman of ERAS Society; global advisory board of Merck & Co, Inc; scientific advisory board of Senzime; global advisory board of NMD Pharma; and recipient of research grants from Merck & Co,    Inc, and The Medicines Company; O.L. reports co-founder and past Chairs of    ERAS Society; founder and shareholder of ENcare AB (SE); advisor to Nutricia    (NL); honorarium recipient of Nutricia (NL), Fresenius-Kabi (DE), Pharmacosmos    (DK) and Medtronic (IT); R.D.U. reports fees and/or funding from Pfizer, Merck,    Covidien, Acel Rx, Heron, Cook; federal funding from the National Institutes    of Health, National Science Foundation; Vice-President ERAS USA.    Independent peer review and oversight has been provided by the members of    the Society for Vascular Surgery Document Oversight Committee (Marc    Schermerhorn, Chair, Britt Tonnessen, Vice Chair, Mohammad Eslami, Raul    Guzman, Peter Henke, Vikram Kashyap, Ahmed Kayssi, Chris Kwolek, Erika    Mitchell, Patrick Muck, William Robinson, Evan Ryer, Palma Shaw, Chris Smolock, Chandu Vemuri, Greg Westin, and Karen Woo).    Correspondence: Katharine L. McGinigle, MD, MPH, Department of Surgery,    School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3022    Burnett-Womack Bldg, CB 7212, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 (e-mail:    Katharine_mcginigle@med.unc.edu).    The editors and reviewers of this article have no relevant financial relationships to    disclose per the Journal policy that requires reviewers to decline review of any    manuscript for which they may have a conflict of interest.    0741-5214    Copyright  2023 by the Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc.    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2023.01.018    1    2a. Nutritional deficiency ................................................. 3    Anemia screening .................................................................. 3    Frailty ................................................................................................ 5    Delirium risk ................................................................................ 6    Psychosocial concerns ........................................................ 6    Tobacco and alcohol cessation ................................... 6    Medical risk ................................................................................. 7    Cardiac risk .................................................................................. 7    Pulmonary risk .......................................................................... 7    Glycemic control ..................................................................... 7    Perioperative antithrombotic strategy/plan .......... 8    Resuming antiplatelet and anticoagulation    medications ................................................................................ 8    PREOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ........................ 9    4. Fasting ........................................................................................... 9    Carbohydrate loading ............................................................. 9    Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis .................. 10    7. Pre-anesthetic sedative and analgesia    medication ....................................................................................... 10    8. Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin    preparation to reduce surgical site infections .... 10    9. Prevention of nausea and vomiting ...................... 11    INTRAOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ................... 11    10. Anesthetic protocol .......................................................... 11    11. Goal-directed fluid therapy .......................................... 11    12. Body temperature management .......................... 12    13. Surgical access and techniques .............................. 12    Autologous blood salvage ............................................... 12    Groin incisions and closure ............................................ 12    Vein harvest ................................................................................. 12    Hybrid surgery ........................................................................... 13    POSTOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ..................... 13    14. Multimodal analgesia and opioid reduction 13    15. Oral feeding ............................................................................. 13    16. Glycemic control ................................................................. 13    17. Urinary drainage .................................................................. 14    18. Early mobilization ............................................................... 14    19. Discharge criteria and post discharge    education .......................................................................................... 14    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION ......................................... 14    AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS ................................................. 15    Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) pathways    have been beneficial for many surgical specialties, and    have recently been developed for open aortic surgery.1,2    The concept of multi-disciplinary care to control perioperative physiology and maintain hemostasis to attenuate    stress and accelerate convalescence was first described    in 1997.3 Since then ERAS has spread to six continents,    and 20 surgical specialties have published formal ERAS    Society consensus statements. Although each specialty    and geographic region may be unique, the common    foundational theme is to create a culture in which all    perioperative physicians, surgeons, nurses, and therapists    work together within a clinical pathway to apply    evidence-based practice in unison.    Vascular surgery patients, specifically patients with    peripheral artery disease (PAD), present unique challenges due to their advanced age, frailty, and multiple    comorbidities compared with the general population.    This combination of factors results in complex management strategies, increased utilization of health care resources, prolonged hospitalizations, and rehabilitation    needs.4 ERAS, with its aim of delivering high-quality    perioperative care and accelerating recovery, appears    well-suited to address the needs of patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass operations, but unfortunately,    there is not enough published data to support formal    ERAS guidelines. To reduce unwarranted clinical practice variation and to potentially enhance clinical care,    this document is a synthesis of the existing literature    for best practices and provides a framework for the    perioperative care of patients undergoing open surgical infrainguinal bypass. The paper also shows the    gaps in the literature and suggests areas where    research is needed for more robust knowledge to    improve the care for this patient group.    METHODS    Formation of the Guideline Development Group and    selection of topics. In collaboration, the Society for    Vascular Surgery and the ERAS Society initiated the formation of the multidisciplinary, international Guideline    Development Group (GDG), which consisted of vascular    surgeons, anesthesiologists, and advanced practice providers with expertise in ERAS and vascular pathophysiology. The GDG was consulted for advice on    appropriate items to be included, with the final decision    being made by the lead authors (KM and HDB). The    selected topics for the consensus statement were allocated to authors for literature summary depending on    each individual・s expertise. The final content was agreed    upon by all authors.    Literature search strategy. A third-party team of investigators and a reference librarian specializing in literature reviews assisted the GDG in identifying and    categorizing the existing effectiveness and comparative    effectiveness literature on ERAS protocols relevant to    vascular surgery. The librarian executed and documented the search in July 2019 (Appendix 1). The    databases queried included PubMed, CINAHL, and    clinicaltrials.gov. Systematic reviews, randomized    controlled trials (RCTs), and observational cohort studies    reporting on adults ($18 years) undergoing lower extremity vascular surgery and reporting on any one or    combinations of the ERAS guideline items were    included. GDG members then searched reference lists    and repeated literature searches to include any new    publications through December 2021. Many ERAS items    had not been studied specifically in patients undergoing    2 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    infrainguinal bypass, so published data and ERAS    guidelines from other surgical specialties were included    for the elements that were generalizable. The included    studies were carefully reviewed by the GDG, who unanimously agreed upon them.    Quality assessment, data analyses, and consensus    generation. Suggestions for best perioperative practices    were made based on the supporting literature specific    to this patient population, and, at times, supporting literature extrapolated from other surgical populations.    Assessment of the quality of evidence was judged to    be high, moderate, or low. Where non-vascular literature was used as a primary basis for suggestions, the    quality of evidence was extrapolated to this population    and indicated in each section. Because of this, although    some of the practice suggestions are based from a highquality evidence base and are unlikely to change, other    suggestions are merely from expert consensus or lowquality evidence and may change if more rigorous    research is performed.    The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system was used to    judge the literature, but formal recommendations using    the GRADE system were not made across all elements    due to lack of consistently high-quality data derived    from this specific patient population.5    RESULTS    The literature search yielded 3460 citations. There were    109 studies addressing ERAS interventions, as either individual core elements or combinations of elements, in    vascular surgery patients, and another 18 studies    included mixed cohorts, including vascular surgery patients. Most of these studies involved vascular patients    with abdominal aortic pathology, and only 45 involved    patients undergoing lower extremity vascular operations.    Structured around the 22 ERAS core elements, 26 suggestions for best perioperative practices were made    and organized into preadmission, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative sections (Table).    PREADMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS    1. Patient information, education, and counseling    Preoperative education and counseling are cornerstones of ERAS pathways to engage patients and caregivers in all aspects of their perioperative care. It allows    setting and managing expectations regarding early    mobility, postoperative pain control, anticipated length    of stay (LOS), and follow-up.6,7 Although studies on lower    extremity bypass-specific education strategies are lacking, there is literature, including an RCT, from other general surgical specialties on use of extended pre- and    postoperative counseling, guidance by an ERAS nurse,    and written information leads to less pain, less nausea,    reduced time as an inpatient, and increased enhanced    recovery pathway adherence.8-10    Suggestion: Patients should receive dedicated verbal    and written preoperative education and counseling.    Quality of evidence: Low.    2. Assessment and optimization: (a) nutritional deficiency; (b) anemia screening; (c) frailty; (d) delirium risk;    (e) psychosocial concerns, and (f) tobacco and alcohol    overconsumption    2a. Nutritional deficiency. Poor nutrition in patients    with PAD undergoing revascularization correlates with    worse outcomes, including increased mortality and    risk of major amputation.11-14 Poor nutrition also significantly impacts wound healing in patients with chronic    limb-threatening ischemia, a group that is particularly    high-risk for baseline malnutrition.13,15,16 Coupled to    these issues, limited mobility due to rest pain, tissue    loss, or prior contralateral amputation can induce a    decline in basal energy expenditure, reduced insulin    sensitivity, anabolic resistance to protein nutrition, and    muscle strength.17    Preoperative nutritional deficiency can be established    by screening.18 There are many nutritional screening    tools available, and only expert consensus regarding    the best; however, the European Society for Clinical    Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN) suggests the Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST) be used in the    outpatient community setting, and Nutritional Risk    Screening 2002 (NRS 2002) for inpatients.18,19 These    guidelines have suggested specific parameters for severe    nutritional risk based on weight loss, body mass index,    and preoperative serum albumin concentration.    If one of these criteria is present, formal nutritional    assessment is needed, and targeted nutritional therapy    should be initiated.18,19 Oral nutritional supplements,    including those containing immunonutrients,20-22 are    almost always preferred to enteral or parenteral nutrition    regimens.18 Regimens for treating malnutrition via oral    nutritional supplementation have shown greatest effect    if started at least 7 to 10 days preoperatively in nonvascular cohorts.23-26    Suggestion: Screen for malnutrition and treat nutritional deficiency preferably with oral regimens.    Quality of evidence: Moderate.    2b. Anemia screening. Preoperative anemia, is associated with poor outcomes after surgery and is common    in patients undergoing lower extremity arterial bypass.27-    30 Although blood transfusion can quickly correct    preoperative anemia, caution should be used, as transfusion is also associated with increased mortality and    morbidity.31,32 There are benefits to avoiding transfusion,    and it is recommended that patients who are at risk for    transfusion such as those with severe anemia or with    moderate to large volume blood loss (>500 mL) undergo    testing and treatment for anemia when possible.33    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 3    Volume -, Number -    Table. Best practice suggestion and level of evidence for each Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) element    ERAS element Suggestion Evidence level    Preadmission    1. Patient information, education,    counseling    Patients should receive dedicated verbal and written preoperative    education and counseling.    Lowa    2a. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: nutritional    deficiency    Screen for malnutrition and treat nutritional deficiency preferably    with oral regimens.    Moderatea    2b. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: anemia    Evaluate the cause of and treat chronic preoperative anemia. Low    2c. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: frailty    Screen for frailty as a routine part of preoperative patient    assessment.    Moderate    2d. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: delirium    Screen for delirium risk and implement preoperative practices to    minimize onset of delirium as a routine part of practice.    Low    2e. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: psycho-social    Routinely screen for depression. Low    2f. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: tobacco and    alcohol    i. Prescribe smoking cessation therapy before surgery.    ii.. Recommend alcohol cessation prior to surgery.    Higha    Lowa    2h. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: medical risk    Evaluate and optimize comorbidities prior to elective surgery and    consider medical risks before urgent surgery.    High    2i. Screening, assessment, and    optimization: glycemic control    All patients should have a baseline HbA1c level prior to    revascularization. In patients with elevated HbA1c levels, antihyperglycemic treatment should be initiated and/or titrated with    the assistance of a specialist.    High    3. Preoperative anti-platelet,    anticoagulation plan    Continue aspirin throughout the perioperative period. High    Preoperative    4. Fasting Avoid overnight fasting; encourage clear fluids up to 2 hours and    light foods up to 6 hours prior to the induction of general    anesthesia.    Higha    5. Carbohydrate loading Patients without diabetes should receive a preoperative    carbohydrate drink.    Patients with stable diabetes should receive a preoperative    carbohydrate drink alongside their anti-diabetic medication.    Higha    Lowa    6. Venous thromboembolism    prophylaxis    Routinely use either low-dose unfractionated heparin or low    molecular weight heparin with calf-length intermittent    compression devices, when possible, starting prior to surgery or    within 24 hours of surgery end, and continuing throughout the    hospitalization.    Higha    7. Pre-anesthetic sedative and    analgesia medication    i. Do not routinely use sedatives to reduce anxiety preoperatively.    ii. Routinely use preoperative administration of acetaminophen,    NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part of a multimodal opioidsparing analgesia strategy.    iii. For opioid-dependent patients, maintain outpatient pain    regimen in the perioperative period.    Lowa    Lowa    Moderatea    8. Antimicrobials i. Consider the use of bundles programs to reduce SSI.    ii. Prophylactic IV antibiotic dosing should begin 30 to 60 minutes    preoperatively with re-dosing intraoperatively for procedures    greater than 4 hours or with substantive intraoperative blood    loss and extend no more than 24 hours postoperatively.    Low    High    9. PONV Risk-assess for PONV, routinely use multimodal PONV prophylaxis    based on assessment, and use PONV rescue with a different class    of anti-emetic.    Higha    4 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    Laboratory testing may identify a correctable cause for    anemia (eg, iron deficiency). For example, in a large    multi-center series of patients undergoing major elective    surgery, including cardiac surgery, up to 60% of patients    with anemia had low iron stores.34 Subsequent treatment for iron deficiency can include either oral or intravenous routes, depending on the timeline to surgery,    and there is evidence from one RCT and a pooled analysis of observational data from over 2500 patients to support that some patient populations may benefit from    correction of iron deficiency, even with short courses of    treatment.35,36 Even though correction of anemia may    reduce the need for transfusion, there is little evidence    to support that it impacts overall morbidity and mortality, and there are no large studies to date to examine    the effects in a vascular surgery-specific population.35,37-41    Caution is advised in translating certain anemia therapies to lower extremity revascularization amid presence    of the United States Food and Drug Administration・s limitations of use of erythropoietin-stimulating agents in patients undergoing cardiac or vascular surgery, and an    adverse event profile that includes thrombotic events.42    Use of intraoperative interventions, such as minimally    invasive techniques and/or cell salvage for complex cases    anticipated to have long operative time, may also be    considered in order to reduce the need for perioperative    transfusion, particularly in patients with pre-existing    anemia.43,44    Suggestion: Evaluate the cause of and treat chronic    preoperative anemia.    Quality of Evidence: Low.    2c. Frailty. Frailty is a syndrome of diminished physiological reserve that predisposes patients to adverse    health outcomes, especially in the presence of a stressor.    Although frailty and aging are not the same, frailty is    associated with aging and with the presence of PAD.    Table. Continued.    ERAS element Suggestion Evidence level    Intraoperative    10. Anesthetic protocol Use a multimodal analgesic strategy which includes non-opioid    analgesics and regional anesthesia.    Moderate    11. Goal directed fluid therapy Routinely use cardiac monitoring (arterial line and non-invasive    cardiac output monitoring such as stroke volume variation) to    support euvolemia.    Lowa    12. Body temperature    management    Use multiple strategies to maintain normothermia, including prewarming and active warming of patients intraoperatively.    Moderatea    13. Surgical techniques (vein    harvest, groin closure)    i. Close groin incisions with subcuticular sutures and use a    negative-pressure dressing.    ii. Harvest vein conduits with either continuous or skip open    incisions rather than endoscopic harvest.    iii. Consider hybrid surgery both for proximal and distal    revascularization in high-risk patients.    iv. Do not routinely use drains in the surgical wound.    Low    Low    Low    Moderate    Postoperative    14. Multimodal analgesia and    opioid reduction strategies    Routinely use multimodal analgesic regimens to improve pain    control and reduce opioid consumption.    Higha    15. Oral feeding Resume oral nutrition immediately postoperatively. Moderate    16. Glycemic control i. Glycemic goal of 180 mg/dL or less during the perioperative    period.    ii. Routinely use diabetic and nutritional counseling as part of    interdisciplinary care for diabetic patients.    Moderate    High    17. Urinary drainage Remove urinary drainage catheters before leaving the operating    room.    Low    18. Early mobilization strategy Use a formal plan for early mobilization immediately    postoperatively, with early physical therapy involvement when    needed.    Low    19. Discharge education Utilize both written and verbal discharge education, use follow-up    phone calls with 24-48 hours of hospital discharge, and arrange    clinic follow-up with both the surgeon and primary care at least    once by 30 days postoperatively.    Confirm transition plan to outpatient podiatry and/or wound care    center when relevant.    Lowa    Moderate    HbA1c, Hemoglobin A1c; IV, intravenous; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PONV, prevention of nausea and vomiting. aDenotes some of the evidence is extrapolated from non-vascular patient cohorts.    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 5    Volume -, Number -    Loss of muscle mass, walking limitation, and inflammation compound frailty in PAD, and, depending on the    frailty instrument used, the prevalence of frailty in patients with symptomatic PAD varies from 16% to 70%.45    In a retrospective study of almost 140,000 patients    measuring frailty using the Risk Analysis Index, 30-day    mortality was significantly higher for frail patients after    infrainguinal revascularization (nonfrail, 1.1%; frail, 6.3%;    very frail, 9.4%), and frailty was highly predictive of 30-day    postoperative mortality46 Frailty has also been shown to    be associated with major complications after lower extremity bypass.47 A prospective cohort study of patients    with chronic limb-threatening ischemia (N ? 643) undergoing endovascular or open revascularization found    frailty (as measured by the clinical frail scale) associated    with lower overall and amputation-free survival at    2 years.48    Specifically, a small RCT testing an outpatient comprehensive geriatric assessment and optimization program    in elderly patients scheduled for elective aortic or infrainguinal bypass surgery was associated with reduced    complications, shorter hospital LOS, and lower rate of patients discharged to a higher level of care dependency.49    A patient who has a positive frailty screen should be    followed up with a diagnostic assessment of frailty, and,    when feasible, a comprehensive geriatric assessment    with a tailored intervention. Based on observational    data related to shared decision-making and/or prehabilitation experience from other cardiovascular conditions    like aortic and carotid disease, these interventions seem    advisable50; however, currently there are no published    trials evaluating this for patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass.51 Ultimately, variations in disease severity at    presentation may limit feasibility or time available to undergo rehabilitation interventions, although it should be    noted that even patients with ischemic wounds often do    not need urgent revascularization.52-54 In cases where urgent revascularization is required, the use of frailty    screening may still be utilized to guide shared decisionmaking, consideration of alternate treatments that may    still meet goals of care, or expectation setting around    outcomes and recovery challenges.    Suggestion: Screen for frailty as a routine part of preoperative patient assessment.    Quality of evidence: Moderate.    2d. Delirium risk. Delirium can contribute to adverse    events, prolonged hospital stays, non-home discharge    destinations, and mortality following vascular surgery.55,56 Delirium has been noted in medium- to largesize cohort studies utilizing validated delirium assessment scores to have incidences ranging from 5% to    29%57-63; rates as high as 42.3% have been identified in    sub-cohorts of patients with chronic limb-threatening    ischemia.64 Risk factors identified from meta-analysis    of observational studies include age, hypertension, diabetes, hearing impairment, history of transient ischemic    attack or cerebrovascular accident, renal failure, lower    preoperative hemoglobin, duration of surgery, emergent    surgery, and estimated blood loss, whereas regional    anesthesia was protective from development of postoperative delirium.55 A single moderate-sized prospective study of patients with chronic limb-threatening    ischemia undergoing surgical therapy also noted an association of poor nutritional status (Short Nutritional    Assessment Questionnaire for Residential Care [SNAQRC] $3) with delirium.56 Preoperative identification of    cognitive risk using standardized cognitive scales such as    the mini-mental state exam can also allow engagement    of patients/families to discuss implications of proposed    surgery, including the capacity to consent and risk of    postoperative complications including delirium and    brain health.49,65    Suggestion: Screen for delirium risk and implement    preoperative practices to minimize onset of delirium as    a routine part of practice.    Level of Evidence: Low.    2e. Psychosocial concerns. Anxiety, depression, and    lack of social support in particular are described risk factors in the course of recovery after surgery. A variety of    studies have demonstrated that psychosocial factors    play a significant role in recovery and are predictive of    surgical outcomes in patients with PAD.66,67 Estimates    of depression in PAD patients range from 11% to 48% in    cross-sectional studies and from 3% to 36% in longitudinal studies.68 Depression is associated with progressive    declines in walking ability, increased inflammation, and    increased risk of recurrent symptoms.69-71 A single-center    retrospective cohort study of 216 patients undergoing    infrainguinal revacularization found that patients with    depression have worse primary patency (hazard ratio,    1.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.03-3.02; P ? .04) and    higher failure of revascularization (hazard ratio, 2.18; 95%    CI, 1.22-3.88; P < .01).70 Among Veterans with PAD, concurrent depression was associated with a 13% greater    major limb amputation and 17% greater mortality risk    compared with patients with PAD without depression.72    Patients who have a positive screening test should be    referred back to their primary care physician or to a    mental health specialist for formal diagnosis and    treatment.    Suggestion: Routinely screen for depression.    Quality of Evidence: Low.    2f. Tobacco and alcohol cessation. Tobacco is a leading risk factor in the development of PAD and is associated with substantial short- and long-term morbidity    and mortality.73,74 In a cohort of 2913 patients from the    Vascular Quality Initiative registry undergoing infrainguinal bypass surgery, current smoking was associated    with almost 30% increased risk of major adverse limb    events at 1 year.75 In a multi-center retrospective review    of 693 patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass surgery    from 2013 to 2017, patients who smoked more than one    6 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    pack of cigarettes per day were at a 1.48-times increase in    the risk of major adverse limb events at 1 year compared    with patients who smoked less than one pack per day.76    In the perioperative period, nicotine replacement therapy and smoking cessation medications have proven    efficacy for smoking cessation, which is of critical    importance in this specific patient population.77,78    Further, a cluster-randomized trial of 156 current adult    smokers with PAD demonstrated feasibility of a brief    surgeon-delivered smoking cessation intervention    increasing interest in smoking cessation and is associated with declines in nicotine dependence at 3    months.79,80    In addition to limb-based outcomes, there is substantial published literature describing other benefits to preoperative smoking cessation. A systematic review and    meta-analysis of 25 studies (2 RCT, 7 prospective cohort    studies, and 16 retrospective studies) including over    20,000 cardiac and non-cardiac surgical patients, there    was a 23% and 47% reduction in respiratory complications in patients who stopped smoking 4 and 8 weeks    prior to surgery, respectively.81 Another meta-analysis of    four RCTs demonstrated smoking cessation interventions reduced surgical site infections, and pooled data    from 140 cohort studies supports 1 month of smoking    cessation being associated with improved post-surgical    outcomes.82,83    Suggestion: Prescribe smoking cessation therapy    before surgery.    Quality of evidence: High.    In two RCTs comprising 69 surgical patients, 1 month of    preoperative abstinence from alcohol improved outcomes in a patients who imbibed at least five alcohol    equivalents (or 15 units) per day.84 A Cochrane review of    these two studies describes postoperative morbidity is    increased by two- to three-fold in patients who abuse    alcohol, and another meta-analysis of multiple RCTs in    mixed surgical cohorts shows that daily drinking increases the risk of non-surgical site infection, but does    not increase postoperative mortality.85    Suggestion: Recommend alcohol cessation 4 weeks    prior to surgery.    Quality of Evidence: Low.    2h. Medical risk. Patients undergoing lower extremity    bypass surgery generally have multiple cardiovascular,    pulmonary, renal, and metabolic comorbidities that will    influence their medical risk, impact their perioperative    outcomes, and dictate a multidisciplinary approach to    preoperative evaluation and optimization. Medical preoperative assessment and optimization of each major    risk factor should be undertaken in accordance with    the most current clinical practice guidelines on perioperative evaluation, optimization, and management of patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery. Risk scores may    be used to help stratify overall risk of surgery, and the    Vascular Quality Initiative (VQI) mortality prediction    model for patients with chronic limb-threatening    ischemia performs well in American and European cohorts (C ? 0.86).86    Cardiac risk. Patients with PAD have a higher risk of    cardiovascular mortality than patients with coronary artery disease alone.87 Multiple cardiac risk calculators are    available; however, the model discrimination for predicting postoperative myocardial infarction after surgery    are not accurate at predicting postoperative outcomes,    meaning they are unlikely to be of benefit and thus are    not universally recommended.88-91 In clinical practice,    functional capacity or ability to perform metabolic    equivalents is a key determinant of preoperative assessment.92 Unfortunately, in patients with PAD and limited    mobility, standard measures of activity may not be able    to be used. Although poor capacity alone is only weakly    associated with impaired outcomes after lower extremity bypass surgery, cardiac and pulmonary prognosis is    good if functional capacity is high, even in the presence    of stable ischemic heart disease or other risk factors.93    Based on multiple RCTs and multi-society guidelines,    to mitigate cardiac risk, all patients with peripheral    vascular disease should be offered antiplatelet therapy    (81 mg ASA), high-intensity HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors even if the low-density lipoprotein (LDL)    cholesterol <100 mg/dL, and antihypertensives where    there is a persistent systolic blood pressure > 140 mmHg,    unless contraindicated.92 The Coronary Artery Revascularization Prophylaxis (CARP) trial94 showed no survival    benefit with coronary revascularization before elective    vascular surgery, and another RCT95 of 430 patients with    high-risk cardiac stress tests showed no difference in    long-term outcomes in elective vascular surgery with    preoperative coronary revascularization. However, secondary analysis of the data from the CARP trial demonstrated that preoperative revascularization of left main    coronary artery stenoses ($50%) is associated with    improved survival after elective vascular surgery.96    Pulmonary risk. There is an association of lower extremity atherosclerotic occlusive disease with chronic    pulmonary disease due to its connection with current    and prior nicotine abuse. There is no high-quality evidence on the effectiveness of routine preoperative chest    radiography or pulmonary function tests in patients undergoing lower extremity bypass surgery.97 Patients    should only undergo these tests if they have new or unstable cardiopulmonary signs or symptoms, or if they are    believed to be at such an increased risk of pulmonary    complications that the results will alter management (ie,    inform decisions or postpone surgery).98-100    Suggestion: Evaluate and optimize comorbidities prior    to elective surgery and consider medical risks before urgent surgery.    Quality of evidence: High.    2i. Glycemic control. Over 20% of patients over 65 years    have impaired fasting glucose, and up to one-third of    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 7    Volume -, Number -    those patients do not carry a current diagnosis of    diabetes.101 Diabetes accelerates the progression of    atherosclerosis102-104 and is common in patients with    peripheral artery disease and chronic limb-threatening    ischemia.54,105 There are conflicting reports of whether    a diagnosis of diabetes alone adversely impacts    outcomes after revascularization106-110; however, there is    evidence to support that prolonged hyperglycemia as    evidenced by an elevated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) is    associated with worse outcomes.102,111,112 Retrospective    analyses of patients undergoing revascularization with    abnormal HbA1c (>7%) found that incremental increases    in HbA1c is associated with increasing risk of overall    complications, adverse limb events, and major amputation, regardless of whether patients had a prior diagnosis    of diabetes.113,114 Complications were particularly significant in patients with very elevated HbA1c values of    >10%.114    Preoperative evaluation prior to lower extremity arterial    bypass should include baseline HbA1c measurement.115,116    Because prediabetes and diabetes are also frequently    undiagnosed, baseline HbA1c measurement should be    obtained regardless of a prior diagnosis of diabetes. For    patients with elevated HbA1c and no existing medical    care plan, referral to a specialist should be obtained.    For those already on anti-hyperglycemic medication    and an elevated HbA1c, particularly if it is >10%, there    may be some benefit to attempts to improve hyperglycemic control prior to surgery.114 Although there is no    strong evidence to support a specific preoperative    HbA1c level prior to revascularization in patients with    PAD, attempts to obtain strict control (HbA1c <6%), as    opposed to standard control (HbA1c, 7%-8%), in highrisk patients with diabetes was associated with worse    outcomes in a randomized control trial of 10,251 patients    with type 2 diabetes mellitus.117 Therefore, the preoperative goal should be relative improvement in hyperglycemia and must be weighed against the urgency of the    procedure.    Recommendations for preoperative management of    specific anti-hyperglycemic regimens in type 2 diabetics    varies based on the anticipated fasting time and invasiveness of the procedure.118 Although a feature of    enhanced recovery is reduced fasting time, given the    invasiveness of lower extremity arterial bypass, most    oral anti-hyperglycemic patients should be held the    day of surgery. This is particularly true for patients on    Metformin who will receive intravenous contrast exposure during the procedure. Depending on the specific insulin regimen, insulin doses should be continued as    prescribed or a slightly reduced (80%) dose the day prior    to surgery and then held or moderately reduced (50%)    the day of surgery.118    Suggestion: All patients should have a baseline HbA1c    level prior to revascularization. In patients with elevated    HbA1c levels, anti-hyperglycemic treatment should be    initiated and/or titrated with the assistance of a    specialist.    Quality of Evidence: High.    3. Perioperative antithrombotic strategy/plan    Based on an RCT and a prospective cohort study of over    1600 patients undergoing vascular surgery, aspirin reduces adverse cardiovascular events and mortality    among patients with coronary artery disease and should    be continued during the perioperative period.119-121 Often,    patients with coexistent coronary artery disease and PAD    are on dual anti-platelet therapy, and based on multiple    large observational studies of mixed surgical populations, the 2016 American College of Cardiology/American    Health Association Guidelines recommend avoiding    discontinuation of the second agent within 1 month after    bare metal and 6 months after drug-eluting coronary    stent placement.121-125 When feasible, any anti-platelet    medication other than aspirin must be stopped 7 days    prior to surgery to reduce the risk of regional anesthesia    techniques, and may be resumed 6 hours after block    performance or epidural catheter removal.126,127 Both    warfarin and direct oral anticoagulants should be discontinued at least 5 days and 2 days in advance of surgery,    respectively, to allow for regional anesthetic techniques    and to reduce the risk of intra-operative bleeding.128    Resuming antiplatelet and anticoagulation medications. Little evidence is available on timing of perioperative resumption or initiation of anticoagulation and    antiplatelet agents. The VOYAGER randomized control    trial required randomization to therapy within 10 days    post-procedure,129 and the CASPAR trial maintained    patients on aspirin and initiated clopidogrel in its therapy    arm within 2 to 4 days postoperatively,130 but published    results from most other trials lack timing of postoperative initiation and focus on long-term risks of therapies. As detailed in the Global Vascular Guidelines on    the Management of Chronic Limb-threatening Ischemia,    risks and benefits of long-term medication regimens vary    based on conduit type, disease stage, and the relative    threat to bypass patency anticipated from anatomic and    operative factors.54    In a Cochrane Review and meta-analysis of 16 studies    with 5683 randomized patients, antiplatelet therapy    had a beneficial effect on primary patency of bypass    grafts compared with placebo or no therapy.131 For vein    bypasses, aspirin or dipyridamole monotherapy showed    significant benefit in meta-analysis to primary graft    patency only at 1 year (but not significant benefit at 1,3,    6, or 24 months); in contrast, significant primary patency    benefit was seen at all time points up through 1 year for    prosthetic conduit bypasses. In the CASPAR trial,    randomizing dual antiplatelet therapy of aspirin and clopidogrel vs aspirin and placebo for below-knee popliteal    bypasses, vein bypasses did not have a patency benefit,    whereas a significant benefit was observed in prosthetic    8 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    bypasses over median follow-up of just under 1 year.130    An increase in bleeding events with dual antiplatelet    therapy was seen for venous grafts but not prosthetic    grafts.131    Differential benefits of postoperative anticoagulant    therapy have been noted for venous bypasses and prosthetic bypasses in moderate-sized RCTs.132,133 In metaanalysis of vitamin K antagonists therapy compared    with no anticoagulant therapy, a significant protective    benefit from occlusion was only seen at 6 months, but    not at 3 months, or 1, 2, or 5 years in venous bypasses    and only at a late interval (5 years) after prosthetic bypasses.134 In venous bypasses at all time points from 3    to 24 months, vitamin K antagonists were protective    against occlusion compared with aspirin or dipyridamole.134 However, major hemorrhagic events occurred    more frequently among patients undergoing femoropopliteal bypass receiving warfarin plus aspirin vs aspirin    alone.135 In a small RTC, postoperative hematoma was    greater among those receiving warfarin and ASA    compared with ASA alone, but no differences were    noted between the groups in the number of packed    red blood cells transfused, or in the incidence rate of    overall non-hemorrhagic wound complications, or the    overall complication rate.136 The combination of warfarin    plus aspirin therapy appears to protect from occlusion in    smaller diameter prosthetic bypasses133 and from severe    ischemia in femoropopliteal PTFE grafts when occlusion    occurs.137    Prospective randomized evidence to date around use    of novel oral anticoagulant agents following lower extremity bypass revascularization comes primarily from    the VOYAGER PAD trial,129 which randomized initiation    of rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily dosing vs placebo in    addition to background antiplatelet therapy; of note, clopidogrel as an adjunct to study antithrombotic regimen    could be administered for up to 60 days after a lower extremity revascularization at the discretion of the investigator.138,139 Among the 2185 patients who underwent    surgical lower extremity intervention (lower extremity    bypass, endarterectomy, or both), a benefit was seen    with rivaroxaban in prevention of acute limb ischemia    events.138 The median time from revascularization to    study drug initiation among the surgical revascularizations was 6 days, and bleeding risk of rivaroxaban    appeared to be consistent between those initiated on    medication therapy less than 6 days from surgery vs 6    or more days from surgery. Bleeding events requiring    an unplanned take-back procedure remained low    (1.3%) and did not differ between rivaroxaban vs placebo    therapies; similarly, in the long term, by 3 years, the cumulative incidence of major bleeding did not differ between rivaroxaban vs placebo within the surgical    bypasses.138    Suggestion: Continue aspirin throughout the perioperative period.    Level of evidence: High.    Suggestion: Consider adjunctive anticoagulation therapy in prosthetic or high-risk bypasses.    Level of evidence: Moderate.    PREOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS    4. Fasting. Based on meta-analysis of multiple RCTs in a    range of surgical patients and according to both the    American Society of Anesthesiologists・ and European    Society of Anesthesiology・s preoperative fasting guidelines that give a strong recommendation based on highquality evidence, patients should be allowed to drink    clear fluids up to 2 hours before elective surgery, but    should not eat any solid food for at least 6 hours for ：light    meals； or 8 hours for fatty foods and meat.140,141 It is    important to note that these recommendations apply to    patients who undergo elective procedures, and a longer    fasting period may be necessary in patients with risk    factors for delayed gastric emptying such as obesity,    diabetes, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux    disease.    Suggestion: Avoid overnight fasting; encourage clear    fluids up to 2 hours and light foods up to 6 hours prior    to the induction of general anesthesia.    Level of evidence: High.    5. Carbohydrate loading. Although the effectiveness of    carbohydrate loading has not been fully established in    patients undergoing vascular surgery, several RCTs in    other surgical populations demonstrate a preoperative    carbohydrate drink compared with placebo or fasting    after midnight reduce insulin resistance and lessen the    risk of hyperglycemia after surgery.142-148 The most    commonly studied preoperative carbohydrate regimen    is 800 mL of a clear 12.5% carbohydrate drink the evening before surgery and 400 mL up to 2 hours before    surgery.144-148 A systematic review of 22 RCTs found that    oral carbohydrate loading is safe up to 2 hours prior to    surgery and can improve postoperative discomfort,149    and a Cochrane Review of 27 RCTs of variable quality in    mixed surgical populations conclude that preoperative    carbohydrate loading reduces hospital length of stay.150    As many patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass have    diabetes, the question of effectiveness and safety has    been raised. It has been suggested that carbohydrate    drink alternatives such as popular sports drinks may be    more appropriate for patients with a diagnosis of diabetes; however, the evidence to support this practice is    low.7 Despite low quality evidence, it appears that oral    carbohydrates are safe and effective in well-controlled    diabetic patients, without a significant risk of hyperglycemia or aspiration.151,152    Suggestion: Patients without diabetes should receive a    preoperative carbohydrate drink.    Level of evidence: High.    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 9    Volume -, Number -    Suggestion: Patients with well-controlled diabetes    should receive a preoperative carbohydrate drink.    Level of evidence: Low.    6. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis. VTE risk can    be significantly reduced by incorporating multiple strategies such as early mobility, mechanical prophylaxis, and    chemoprophylaxis. Compiling data from over 100 RCTs    of mixed populations comparing low-dose unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin, and no    chemoprophylaxis, the American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on the prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in nonorthopedic surgical patients    notes that there is significant reduction in VTE when    prophylactic doses of either of these anticoagulants are    used and that bleeding complications are rare.153    The use of mechanical prophylaxis should be employed    along with chemoprophylaxis or alone in patients who    have a high risk of bleeding. Mechanical prophylaxis decreases the risk for postoperative VTE by preventing    venous stasis and reducing plasminogen activator    inhibitor-1, increasing endogenous fibrinolytic activity.    Mechanical compression stockings should be avoided in    patients with severe arterial disease despite intervention    (systolic ankle pressure <60 mmHg; toe pressure    <30 mmHg).154 Intermittent pneumatic compression    and venous foot pumps are not contraindicated in patients who have had infrainguinal bypass surgery, but mechanical prophylaxis should be avoided in patients with in    situ bypasses, tibial bypass, or any other instance the    compression device would place direct pressure on the    conduit.155    Suggestion: Routinely use either low-dose unfractionated heparin or low molecular weight heparin with    calf-length intermittent compression devices, when    possible, starting either prior to surgery or within 24    hours of surgery end, and continuing throughout the    hospitalization.    Quality of literature: High.    7. Pre-anesthetic sedative and analgesia medication.    Preoperative anxiety is frequent and may lead to    increased perioperative analgesic requirements. Multiple    prospective and retrospective cohort studies demonstrate benzodiazepines can cause neurocognitive    impairment and have unwanted sedative effects156-159;    therefore, sedative or anxiolytic drugs should be avoided.    This is particularly important in patients over 65 years old,    as the American Geriatric Society has made a strong    recommendation, with moderate evidence, against the    use of benzodiazepines in older adults.157    Patients with PAD often have pre-existing chronic    pain, due to ischemic rest pain and/or tissue loss,    which are key features of this disease.160 Perioperative    pain management may be complicated by established analgesic regimens as well as advanced age    and pre-existing comorbidities including renal    impairment.161 Dosed appropriately for age and renal    function, multimodal opioid-sparing perioperative    analgesia includes acetaminophen, non-steroidal    anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and gabapentinoids, all of which have been shown to decrease    postoperative pain scores, facilitate opioid sparing    pain management, and can be administered in a    cost-effective manner.159,162    Patients who are currently using analgesics for    chronic pain could benefit from an interdisciplinary    approach and should have expectations set for postoperative pain management before the operation occurs.    Abruptly stopping the patient・s baseline opioid medication can result in inadequate postoperative pain control and increased risk of acute withdrawal in the    postoperative period, and this is not recommended.163    This is particularly true for patients taking    methadone.164    For patients on buprenorphine (especially >12 mg/day),    even dose decreases can cause withdrawal, and patients    will need their pain specialist to gradually reduce the    dose prior to any operation in which postoperative opioids will be used.165    Notably, revascularization may improve chronic    ischemic pain, and outpatient tapers of all types of analgesics may be possible.    Suggestion: Do not routinely use sedatives to reduce    anxiety preoperatively.    Level of evidence: Low.    Suggestion: Routinely use preoperative administration    of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part    of a multimodal opioid-sparing analgesia strategy.    Level of evidence: Low.    Suggestion: Continue existing preoperative pain regimens with minimal disruption.    Level of evidence: Moderate.    8. Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin preparation to    reduce surgical site infections. Surgical site infections    (SSIs) can involve superficial or deep incisional tissues,    and are typically caused by typical skin flora, although    vascular surgical wounds and/or ischemic wounds can    have a variety of organisms.166 A bundled program to    prevent the development of SSI is often recommended    and may reduce SSI by 51% in a single-center observational study.167 Specifically included in most bundles are    perioperative normothermia, appropriate skin preparation and hair removal, preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis, and minimizing traffic in and out of the operating    room.168 Adjunctive use of antibiotics such as triclosancoated suture or gentamicin-impregnated grafts have    mixed results and have not been shown to consistently    reduce SSIs.169,170    Skin preparation should be standardized, with the    operative area being scrubbed on the day prior to and    10 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    immediately before surgery with a Chlorhexidine    solution based on RCTs of heterogeneous cleancontaminated surgeries indicating benefit, though    smaller RCTs and prospective observational studies of    vascular reconstructions have not demonstrated    benefit.171-173 Based on meta-analysis of a small number    of RCTs with heterogeneous surgical procedures and    quasi-experimental cohort studies of vascular surgeries,    hair clipping should be performed immediately preoperatively, with hair clipping preferred to shaving.167,174,175    Preoperative intravenous prophylactic antibiotics    should be administered immediately prior to lower extremity bypass based on meta-analysis of RCTs.176 Antibiotic duration has been primarily evaluated in patients    without pre-existing infectious sources; in lower extremity bypass procedures with non-infected tissue, prophylactic antibiotics did not convey significant additional    benefit when continued more than 24 hours postoperatively.176 Extrapolated from cardiac and spine surgery,    intraoperative antibiotic should be re-dosed within two    serum half-lives of the agent177-179 and may be additionally recommended for substantive procedural blood    loss.180    Suggestion: Consider the use of bundles programs to    reduce SSIs.    Quality of Evidence: Low.    Suggestion: Prophylactic intravenous antibiotic dosing    should begin 30 to 60 minutes preoperatively with    redosing intraoperatively within two serum half-lives of    antimicrobial agent used or with substantive intraoperative blood loss, and extending no more than 24 hours    postoperatively.    Quality of evidence: High.    9. Prevention of nausea and vomiting. Postoperative    nausea and vomiting (PONV) is estimated to be 50%    and 30% in the general surgical population, respectively,    and may approach 80% in patients who are high risk for    PONV.181 The most commonly used PONV risk scoring    systems are the Koivuranta and Apfel scores.182,183 It is    important to employ PONV mitigation strategies, such as    minimizing the use of nitrous oxide and volatile anesthetics,184 utilizing regional anesthesia such as peripheral    nerve blocks and neuraxial anesthesia,185 and including    opioid-sparing, multimodal analgesia techniques.186,187    There is significant high quality evidence from multiple    RCTs supporting the use of multimodal prophylaxis and    treatment of PONV that can be generalized to major    vascular surgery.188 Pharmacologic agent classes and    other interventions that are currently available include    5-HT3 receptor antagonists, corticosteroids, antihistamines, dopamine antagonists, propofol anesthesia, NK-1    receptor antagonists, anticholinergics, and acupuncture.189 For rescue treatment, one should use an antiemetic from different class than what was used for    prophylaxis.    Suggestion: Risk assess for PONV, routinely use multimodal PONV prophylaxis based on assessment, and    use PONV rescue with a different class of anti-emetic.    Quality of evidence: High.    INTRAOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS    10. Anesthetic protocol    Patients undergoing peripheral vascular procedures    often have widespread atherosclerotic disease and suffer    significantly from cardiac complications and death,    mandating hemodynamic stability throughout    surgery.190,191    Although the role of regional anesthesia in ERAS has    gained interest in recent years, there remains no clear evidence favoring regional (spinal, epidural, or peripheral    nerve blockade) or general anesthesia over the other. Individual studies have suggested specific benefits from    regional anesthesia: these include attenuation of the    neuroendocrine response to surgery,192 reduction in    blood loss,193 improvement in pulmonary function,194    reduction in myocardial ischemia,195 enhancement of    lower limb blood flow,196 and reduction the incidence    of graft thrombosis and thrombotic response to surgery.197,198 Evidence of possible long-term benefit from    regional anesthesia remains elusive, and there are data    to suggest that the type of anesthesia given for peripheral vascular surgery does not significantly affect cardiac    morbidity or mortality, overall mortality, or LOS.193,198-200    However, an RCT of 50 patients found fewer intraoperative episodes of myocardial ischemia in patients undergoing infra-inguinal bypass surgery under combined    femoral and sciatic nerve blockade compared with general anesthesia.201    Whether choosing a regional or general anesthesia    approach, the intraoperative analgesic strategy should    include at least one or two simple non-opioid analgesics    such as acetaminophen, NSAIDs, an a2-agonist, or    ketamine.202    Summary/Recommendation: Use a multimodal analgesic strategy that includes non-opioid analgesics and    regional anesthesia tailored the expected duration of    pain and postoperative course.    Quality of evidence: Moderate.    11. Goal-directed fluid therapy    Intraoperative fluid management is a fundamental part    of enhanced recovery programs, and both hypovolemia    and hypervolemia have been strongly associated with    significant postoperative complications. These include:    impaired peripheral organ perfusion, site infection, poor    wound healing, tissue edema, fluid overload, acute kidney injury and sepsis, as well as increased morbidity    and mortality, and longer hospital stay in patients undergoing major abdominal and colorectal surgery.203-205    Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses including    observational studies and RCTs have shown that goalJournal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 11    Volume -, Number -    directed fluid therapy decreases postoperative morbidity    and mortality in surgical patients,206 as well as reduces    both the volume of fluids administered and the incidence of complications, while still protecting renal    function.205    Patients presenting for infrainguinal arterial operations    are fundamentally physiologically different from the general cohort of patients presenting for major abdominal    and colorectal surgery; they are often older with multiple    coexisting comorbidities. Furthermore, the nature of surgery is different. Subgroup analysis has shown no evidence to support the use of goal-directed fluid therapy    in peripheral vascular surgery patients; however, basic    physiological principles apply to this high-risk group of    patients. Avoidance of intraoperative hypotension,    defined as a 40% decrease from pre-induction mean    arterial blood pressure with a cumulative duration of    more than 30 minutes, and prevention of fluid overload    are fundamental to avoiding adverse outcomes in this    patient group.207,208    Suggestion: Routinely use cardiac monitoring (arterial    line and non-invasive cardiac output monitoring such    as stroke volume variation) to support euvolemia.    Quality of evidence: Low.    12. Body temperature management    Perioperative hypothermia (core body temperature <36 C) is a result of cold operating room temperatures, exposure of the patient, and anesthesia-related impairment    of central thermoregulatory control. Hypothermia leads    to cardiac arrhythmias, coagulopathies, altered levels of    consciousness, decreased drug metabolism, impaired    renal function, leftward shift in the hemoglobin oxygen    saturation curve, resulting in reduced oxygen delivery,    and prolonged wound healing and increased SSIs.    From a combination of RCTs and prospective and retrospective cohorts across many surgical specialties, there is    evidence that maintaining normothermia reduces these    undesired outcomes.209 Strategies to maintain normothermia include preoperative warming (10 to 30 minutes    prior to induction of anesthesia), intraoperative warming    with a forced air heating blanket, and use of fluid    warmers and pre-warmed irrigation.209    Suggestion: Use multiple strategies to maintain normothermia, including prewarming and active warming of    patients intraoperatively.    Quality of evidence: Moderate.    13. Surgical access and techniques    Autologous blood salvage. In contrast to recommendations for aortic surgery,2,210-212 there is insufficient evidence to recommend routine use of autologous blood    salvage in lower extremity bypass cases, due to typically    lower operative losses associated with these infrainguinal    procedures.43,44,213    Groin incisions and closure. Groin incisions are prone    to infections and surgical morbidity, and reported rates    in literature range widely from approximately 3% to    30%.214,215 A Cochrane Review of two RCTs that    included 283 groin incisions found with low certainty    that transverse incisions for the exposure of the common    femoral artery resulted in fewer SSIs.216 Another metaanalysis that included the same 2 RCTs and added 5    case-control studies compared transverse with longitudinal incisions in 5922 groins and found that transverse    incisions had significantly lower incidence of surgical site    infection (0.73% vs 3.68%; P ? .03) and wound dehiscence, but that lymphatic complications were similar    (8.58% vs 10.9%; P ? .87).217    Multiple techniques are described in literature to optimize groin closure to reduce the risk for SSIs. A systematic review of eight RCTs shows that use of plastic    adhesive skin coverings with or without antimicrobial    properties does not reduce the incidence of SSIs.218    Meta-analysis of 17 RCTs and seven observational studies    noted that subcuticular sutures for skin closure had a significant reduction in SSI rates when compared with surgical clips or transdermal sutures (odds ratio, 0.33; 95% CI,    0.17-0.65; P ? .001).219 When evaluating adjuncts to    closure, closed incision negative pressure wound therapy    significantly reduced the risk of SSI compared with standard dressings (odds ratio, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.23-0.51; P <    .001).219 Use of local antibiotics, fibrin glue, silver alginate    dressings, and platelet-rich plasma have inconsistent results, but have not shown any statistically significant effects on SSI rates in metanalysis.219-223    Similarly, a Cochrane Review of three RCTs demonstrates there is no evidence usage of drains will decrease    groin incision complications.224    Patients at high risk for groin incisional complications    (females, patients with obesity, patients with end-stage    renal disease) may benefit from prophylactic sartorius    muscle flap closure.225,226 Although incisional breakdown was similar between the groups, the presence of    a vascularized muscle flap overlying the vascular repair    was associated with reduced need for reoperation and    allowed more wounds to be managed with local wound    care alone.    Suggestion: Avoid the use of drains in groin incisions.    Level of Evidence: Moderate.    Suggestion: When possible, use transverse groin incisions. Close groin incisions with subcuticular sutures    and use a negative-pressure dressing.    Level of Evidence: Low.    Vein harvest. Along with the choice of conduit, the    technique of vein harvest is equally critical. The largest    retrospective study used the VQI database and evaluated    5066 patients from 2003 to 2013. Single continuous incision was used in 48.6%, skip incisions were used in 39.7%,    12 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    and endoscopic vein harvest was used in 12.7%. There    was no difference in SSIs in the three groups, but there    was a statistically significant reduction in patency of    endoscopically harvested veins at 1 year.227 Other retrospective studies have also demonstrated a reduction in    patency of endoscopically harvested veins when used for    lower extremity bypass.228,229    Suggestion: Harvest vein conduits with either continuous or skip open incisions rather than endoscopic    harvest.    Level of evidence: Low.    Hybrid surgery. Hybrid surgery has had a rapid increase in the treatment of PAD and should be considered in patients who are high risk for traditional open    surgery, but have lesions that may not be completely    amenable to endovascular intervention.230 Although    hybrid surgery is increasingly utilized, the population is    very heterogeneous, and the data are limited, which    reinforces the importance of case selection and treating    patients with complex PAD at centers equally capable    of both open and endovascular approaches. The most    commonly described hybrid infrainguinal revascularization is a common femoral artery endarterectomy    with endovascular revascularization of the femoropopliteal artery segment. A retrospective study of    4478 patients undergoing either venous bypass or    prosthetic bypass or hybrid revascularization found that    patients that are submitted to a hybrid intervention are    older than the other groups and more likely to be    treated under regional anesthesia. Compared with    those undergoing a hybrid approach, prosthetic bypass    was associated with more deep SSIs, organ space    SSI, postoperative sepsis, and unplanned 30-day readmission, and vein bypasses were associated with more    superficial SSIs.231 Similarly, a retrospective analysis of    1480 patients from the National Surgical Quality    Improvement Program registry demonstrated superior    short-term outcomes, especially with reduction of SSIs,    with a hybrid approach.232 A retrospective analysis of    850 propensity-matched patients from the VQI    demonstrated that hybrid revascularization was associated with a lower rate of myocardial infarction and    renal complications, shorter hospital LOS, and higher    rate of discharge to home compared with bypass.230    The 1-year outcomes suggested that patients in the    bypass group had a higher likelihood of improvement    in ambulatory status compared with patients in the    hybrid group (16.7% vs 7.7%; P ? .044); however, survival    analysis showed no difference in overall survival or    amputation-free survival between the two groups. A    non-randomized prospective study of infrainguinal    hybrid revascularization in 99 patients with chronic    limb-threatening ischemia demonstrates high technical success rates, and patency at 2.5 years matches    that of other reported infrainguinal bypasses.233    Suggestion: Hybrid surgery and distal endovascular    revascularization can be considered in older patients    and may reduce SSIs.    Level of evidence: Low.    POSTOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS    14. Multimodal analgesia and opioid reduction.    Regional anesthesia is thought to be superior to general    anesthesia for early acute postoperative pain management and side effects; however, the evidence for    improved patient satisfaction is limited.234 There is    good quality evidence to support multimodal analgesia    for postoperative pain relief following surgery.187 These    techniques combine regional anesthetic techniques and    non-opioid analgesics at multiple points in the pain    pathway.235 A Cochrane review identified a 20% to 25%    reduction in pain intensity and a 30% to 50% reduction    in analgesic consumption in surgical patients treated    with a multi-modal strategy.236 The use of clonidine is    associated with reductions in pain, opioid consumption,    and early postoperative nausea and vomiting.237    Acute pain management in vascular surgery patients    with underlying chronic ischemic pain can often be challenging particularly in the postoperative period. One 30-    day postoperative follow-up study showed that 61.3% of    preoperative opioid users and 28.4% of opioid-na?ve patients continued using opioids.238 Given a 35% prevalence of chronic opioid use among patients with PAD    and because revascularization often eliminates ischemic    pain, a concerted effort should be made to taper existing    pain medications.239    Suggestion: Routinely use multimodal analgesic regimens to improve pain control and reduce opioid    consumption.    Level of Evidence: High.    15. Oral feeding. Postoperatively, patients should be    encouraged to reestablish oral nutrition as early as    possible, allowing patients to eat what they feel comfortable with and consume oral nutritional supplements    daily. Patients with chronic limb-threatening ischemia    undergoing either endovascular or open revascularization that have improved postoperative nutritional status    fared better, even when their baseline nutritional status    was poor.13    Suggestion: Resume oral nutrition as early as possible, if    not immediately postoperatively, allowing patients to eat    what they feel comfortable with and consume oral nutritional supplements daily.    Level of Evidence: Moderate.    16. Glycemic control. Patients may benefit from incorporating a dietician to provide nutritional counseling, a    nurse diabetic educator, and endocrinology for patients    who have known diabetes mellitus. Perioperative hyperJournal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 13    Volume -, Number -    glycemia in vascular surgery patients has previously been    defined as a glucose value of greater than 180 mg/dL    within 72 hours of surgery.240 The presence of perioperative hyperglycemia is strongly associated with increased    30-day mortality (5.7% vs 0.7%; P < .01), SSIs (5.7% vs 2.6%;    P ? .01), increased rates of renal failure, postoperative    stroke, and need for readmission.240 The prevalence of    peripheral arterial disease in patients with diabetes    mellitus is estimated to be 29%, with amputation rates in    diabetic patients being five to 10 times higher than in    non-diabetic patients.54,241 Improving glycemic control    provides for reduced numbers of SSIs, facilitates wound    healing, and provides better patient outcomes. Even in    the absence of a known diagnosis, most guidelines    support starting insulin therapy intraoperatively and    postoperatively for a blood glucose of >180 g/dL in supported hospitalized patients with a target of between    140 and 180 g/DL for most patients.242,243 Careful postoperative glycemic control to limit extreme variability in    glucose decreases adverse cardiac events244; however,    caution is advised as aggressive treatment causing hypoglycemia may increase mortality.117,245    Suggestion: Glycemic goal of 180 mg/dL or less during    the perioperative period.    Quality of evidence: Moderate.    Suggestion: Routinely use diabetic and nutritional    counseling as part of interdisciplinary care for diabetic    patients.    Quality of evidence: High.    17. Urinary drainage. Due to concern of catheterassociated urinary tract infection and guidance from    the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the use of prolonged urinary catheters has    decreased.246 Although urinary catheters are often    needed intraoperatively, there is little need for continuous postoperative urine output monitoring after lower    extremity bypass, and catheters should be removed at    the end of the operation, or as soon as possible in    extenuating circumstances.    Suggestion: Remove urinary drainage catheters before    leaving the operating room, or as soon as possible in    extenuating circumstances.    Level of evidence: Low.    18. Early mobilization. PAD, and especially the more    severe chronic limb-threatening ischemia, can lead to a    significant decrease in a patient・s baseline functional    status. Evaluating the baseline functional status and    setting appropriate goals and expectations is imperative    to a successful postoperative mobility plan, and is associated with long-term independence and survival.247    Clear communication of weight-bearing restrictions    and immediate availability of appropriate off-loading    shoes for patients with tissue loss who can partially or    fully weight bear avoids delay in postoperative    mobilization. Mobility is not necessarily limited to    ambulation, and especially for those who are non-weight    bearing, can include any active limb exercise. Depending    on the patient・s clinical condition, this could consist of    simple interventions such as dynamic range of motion,    sitting at the side of the bed, or pivoting to a bedside    chair.248 Successful mobilization strategies require a    multidisciplinary approach, objective evaluation of patient safety and ability for early ambulation, and tracking    progress with a formal mobility scale.249 If patients are    not progressing, then causes of failure need to be    analyzed by the multidisciplinary team, including physical therapists, and corrective measures should be instituted quickly. Multi-disciplinary care teams for vascular    surgery patients have demonstrated improved outcomes when incorporating podiatry and wound care    centers.250,251    Suggestion: Use a formal plan for early mobilization    immediately postoperatively, with early physical therapy    involvement when needed.    Level of evidence: Low.    19. Discharge criteria and post discharge education.    Patients undergoing vascular surgery have 30-day readmission rates as high as 20% and up to one-half of    readmissions are deemed avoidable.252-254 In line with    fundamental ERAS philosophy, there is a published    conceptual model of preventing readmissions in vascular    surgery that includes patient education and timely    communication from the preoperative phase to the    postoperative phase of care.4 A Cochrane Review of two    RCTs concluded that written and verbal information on    specific care instructions, medication lists, and when to    seek medical attention at discharge significantly    increased patient knowledge and satisfaction.255,256 The    data on follow-up postoperative phone calls has been    mixed; a Cochrane Review of 33 studies of mixed methodology from different specialties was inconclusive;    however, no adverse effects of the invention were    reported.257    Suggestion: Utilize both written and verbal discharge    education, use follow-up phone calls with 24 to 48 hours    of hospital discharge, and arrange clinic follow-up with    both the surgeon and primary care at least once at    30 days postoperatively.    Level of evidence: Low.    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION    The main purpose of this consensus statement is to    provide a framework from which to build a multidisciplinary program to implement best perioperative    practices for patients undergoing lower extremity    vascular bypass surgery. As demonstrated in other specialties, forming care teams to enhance patient    optimization and shared decision-making, focus on    physiologic stress minimization, and reduce variation in    14 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    postoperative convalescence promises to improve the    safety and outcomes for patients undergoing infrainguinal bypass operations.    This consensus statement defines current standards    based on the available medical literature, but there are    many gaps in the published medical knowledge specific    to this high-risk group of patients. Of the 36 practice suggestions made, only 11 are based on high-quality evidence. Although the few clinical studies available seem    promising, studies of high methodological quality are    needed. The lines of research to be developed could    include any of the ERAS elements or combined elements, but are particularly needed in pre-admission optimization, prehabilitation, preoperative carbohydrate    loading in diabetics, pre-anesthetic sedatives and analgesia, early mobility protocols, and post-discharge    education.    AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS    Conception and design: KM, OL, HD    Analysis and interpretation: KM, ES, KA, SA, AS, MT, KD, IS,    MD, CS, RU, SH, JS, OL, HD    Data collection: KM, ES, KA, SA, AS, MT, KD, IS, MD, CS, RU,    SH, JS, OL, HD    Writing the article: KM, ES, KA, SA, AS, MT, KD, IS, MD, CS,    RU, SH, JS, OL, HD    Critical revision of the article: KM, ES, KA, SA, AS, MT, KD,    IS, MD, CS, RU, SH, JS, OL, HD    Final approval of the article: KM, ES, KA, SA, AS, MT, KD, IS,    MD, CS, RU, SH, JS, OL, HD    Statistical analysis: Not applicable    Obtained funding: Not applicable    Overall responsibility: KM    REFERENCES    1. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a    review. JAMA Surg 2017;152:292-8.    2. McGinigle KL, Spangler EL, Pichel AC, Ayyash K, Arya S,    Settembrini AM, et al. Perioperative care in open aortic vascular    surgery: a consensus statement by the enhanced recovery after    surgery (ERAS) society and society for vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg    2022;75:1796-820.    3. Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control postoperative pathophysiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth 1997;78:606-17.    4. Brooke BS, De Martino RR, Girotti M, Dimick JB, Goodney PP.    Developing strategies for predicting and preventing readmissions    in vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2012;56:556-62.    5. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, AlonsoCoello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of    evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924-6.    6. McGinigle KL, Eldrup-Jorgensen J, McCall R, Freeman NL,    Pascarella L, Farber MA, et al. A systematic review of enhanced recovery after surgery for vascular operations. J Vasc Surg 2019;70:    629-40.e1.    7. Witcher A, Axley J, Novak Z, Laygo-Prickett M, Guthrie M, Xhaja A,    et al. Implementation of an enhanced recovery program for lower    extremity bypass. J Vasc Surg 2021;73:554-63.    8. Forsmo HM, Erichsen C, Rasdal A, Tvinnereim JM, K?rner H, Pfeffer F.    Randomized controlled trial of extended perioperative counseling    in enhanced recovery after colorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum    2018;61:724-32.    9. de Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Leal FS, Dantas DCS, Anabuki NT, de    Souza AMC, Silva E Lima VP, et al. Preoperative education in    cholecystectomy in the context of a multimodal protocol of perioperative care: a randomized, controlled trial. World J Surg 2014;38:    357-62.    10. Grawe JS, Mirow L, Bouchard R, Lindig M, Huppe M. Impact of    preoperative patient education on postoperative pain in consideration of the individual coping style. Schmerz 2010;24(6 SRC - BaiduScholar):575-86.    11. Gonzalez L, Kassem M, Owora AH, Seligson MT, Richards CY,    Monita MM, et al. Frailty and biomarkers of frailty predict outcome    in veterans after open and endovascular revascularization. J Surg    Res 2019;243:539-52.    12. Bath J, Smith JB, Woodard J, Kruse RL, Vogel TR. Complex relationship between low albumin level and poor outcome after lower    extremity procedures for peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg    2021;73:200-9.    13. Shiraki T, Takahara M, Iida O, Soga Y, Kodama A, Miyashita Y, et al.    Baseline and updated information on nutritional status in patients    with chronic limb threatening ischaemia undergoing revascularisation. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2021;61:467-72.    14. Garcia-Rivera E, San Norberto EM, Fidalgo-Domingos L, RevillaCalavia A, Estevez-Fernandez I, Cenizo-Revuelta N, et al. Impact of    nutritional and inflammatory status in patients with critical limbthreatening ischemia. Int Angiol 2021;40:504-11.    15. Mii S, Guntani A, Kawakubo E, Shimazoe H, Ishida M. Preoperative    nutritional status is an independent predictor of the long-term    outcome in patients undergoing open bypass for critical limb    ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg 2020;64:202-12.    16. Furuyama T, Yamashita S, Yoshiya K, Kurose S, Yoshino S,    Nakayama K, et al. The controlling nutritional status score is    significantly associated with Complete ulcer healing in patients    with critical limb ischemia. Ann Vasc Surg 2020;66:510-7.    17. Breen L, Stokes KA, Churchward-Venne TA, Moore DR, Baker SK,    Smith K, et al. Two weeks of reduced activity decreases leg lean    mass and induces "anabolic resistance" of myofibrillar protein synthesis in healthy elderly. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:2604-12.    18. Lobo DN, Gianotti L, Adiamah A, Barazzoni R, Deutz NEP,    Dhatariya K, et al. Perioperative nutrition: recommendations from    the ESPEN expert group. Clin Nutr (Edinburgh, Scotland) 2020;39:    3211-27.    19. Weimann A, Braga M, Carli F, Higashiguchi T, Hubner M, Klek S, et al.    ESPEN guideline: clinical nutrition in surgery. Clin Nutr (Edinburgh,    Scotland) 2017;36:623-50.    20. Moya P, Miranda E, Soriano-Irigaray L, Arroyo A, Aguilar M-D-M,    Bellon M, et al. Perioperative immunonutrition in normo-nourished    patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal resection. Surg Endosc    2016;30:4946-53.    21. Moya P, Soriano-Irigaray L, Ramirez JM, Garcea A, Blasco O,    Blanco FJ, et al. Perioperative standard oral nutrition supplements    versus immunonutrition in patients undergoing colorectal resection in an enhanced recovery (ERAS) protocol: a multicenter randomized clinical trial (SONVI study). Medicine 2016;95:e3704.    22. Buzquurz F, Bojesen RD, Grube C, Madsen MT, Gogenur I. Impact of    oral preoperative and perioperative immunonutrition on postoperative infection and mortality in patients undergoing cancer    surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis with trial sequential    analysis. BJS Open 2020;4:764-75.    23. Waitzberg DL, Saito H, Plank LD, Jamieson GG, Jagannath P,    Hwang T-L, et al. Postsurgical infections are reduced with specialized nutrition support. World J Surg 2006;30:1592-604.    24. Jie B, Jiang Z-M, Nolan MT, Zhu S-N, Yu K, Kondrup J. Impact of    preoperative nutritional support on clinical outcome in abdominal    surgical patients at nutritional risk. Nutrition 2012;28:1022-7.    25. McClave SA, Kozar R, Martindale RG, Heyland DK, Braga M, Carli F,    et al. Summary points and consensus recommendations from the    North American surgical nutrition summit. JPEN J Parenter Enteral    Nutr 2013;37(5 Suppl):99S-105S.    26. Stoppe C, Goetzenich A, Whitman G, Ohkuma R, Brown T,    Hatzakorzian R, et al. Role of nutrition support in adult cardiac    surgery: a consensus statement from an international multidisciplinary expert group on nutrition in cardiac surgery. Crit Care    2017;21:131.    27. Nandhra S, Boylan L, Prentis J, Nesbitt C, Northern Vascular C. The    influence of preoperative anemia on clinical outcomes after    infrainguinal bypass surgery. Ann Vasc Surg 2020;66:586-94.    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 15    Volume -, Number -    28. Bodewes TCF, Pothof AB, Darling JD, Deery SE, Jones DW, Soden PA,    et al. Preoperative anemia associated with adverse outcomes after    infrainguinal bypass surgery in patients with chronic limbthreatening ischemia. J Vasc Surg 2017;66:1775-85.e2.    29. Baron DM, Hochrieser H, Posch M, Metnitz B, Rhodes A, Moreno RP,    et al. Preoperative anaemia is associated with poor clinical outcome    in non-cardiac surgery patients. Br J Anaesth 2014;113:416-23.    30. Musallam KM, Tamim HM, Richards T, Spahn DR, Rosendaal FR,    Habbal A, et al. Preoperative anaemia and postoperative outcomes    in non-cardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 2011;378:    1396-407.    31. Spahn DR, Goodnough LT. Alternatives to blood transfusion. Lancet    2013;381:1855-65.    32. Isbister JP, Shander A, Spahn DR, Erhard J, Farmer SL, Hofmann A.    Adverse blood transfusion outcomes: establishing causation.    Transfus Med Rev 2011;25:89-101.    33. Munoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, Besser M, Habler O, Kehlet H,    et al. International consensus statement on the peri-operative    management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia    2017;72:233-47.    34. Munoz M, Laso-Morales MJ, Gomez-Ramirez S, Cadellas M, NunezMatas MJ, Garcia-Erce JA. Pre-operative haemoglobin levels and    iron status in a large multicentre cohort of patients undergoing    major elective surgery. Anaesthesia 2017;72:826-34.    35. Spahn DR, Schoenrath F, Spahn GH, Seifert B, Stein P,    Theusinger OM, et al. Effect of ultra-short-term treatment of patients with iron deficiency or anaemia undergoing cardiac surgery:    a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 2019;393:2201-12.    36. Munoz M, Gomez-Ramirez S, Cuenca J, Garcia-Erce JA, IglesiasAparicio D, Haman-Alcober S, et al. Very-short-term perioperative    intravenous iron administration and postoperative outcome in    major orthopedic surgery: a pooled analysis of observational data    from 2547 patients. Transfusion 2014;54:289-99.    37. Guinn NR, Guercio JR, Hopkins TJ, Grimsley A, Kurian DJ,    Jimenez MI, et al. How do we develop and implement a preoperative anemia clinic designed to improve perioperative outcomes    and reduce cost? Transfusion 2016;56:297-303.    38. Enko D, Wallner F, von-Goedecke A, Hirschmugl C, Auersperg V,    Halwachs-Baumann G. The impact of an algorithm-guided management of preoperative anemia in perioperative hemoglobin level    and transfusion of major orthopedic surgery patients. Anemia    2013;2013:641876.    39. Goodnough LT, Maniatis A, Earnshaw P, Benoni G, Beris P, Bisbe E,    et al. Detection, evaluation, and management of preoperative    anaemia in the elective orthopaedic surgical patient: NATA guidelines. Br J Anaesth 2011;106:13-22.    40. Kozek-Langenecker SA, Ahmed AB, Afshari A, Albaladejo P,    Aldecoa C, Barauskas G, et al. Management of severe perioperative    bleeding: guidelines from the European Society of Anaesthesiology:    first update 2016. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2017;34:332-95.    41. Janssen TL, Steyerberg EW, van Gammeren AJ, Ho GH,    Gobardhan PD, van der Laan L. Intravenous iron in a prehabilitation    program for older surgical patients: prospective cohort study. J Surg    Res 2021;257:32-41.    42. Administration USFaD. Epogen (epoetin alfa) injection, for intravenous or subcutaneous use. Drug label. Available at: https://www.    accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/103234s5363s5366lb    l.pdf. Accessed September 28, 2020.    43. Frank SM, Sikorski RA, Konig G, Tsilimigras DI, Hartmann J,    Popovsky MA, et al. Clinical utility of autologous salvaged blood: a    review. J Gastrointest Surg 2020;24:464-72.    44. Tawes RL Jr, Scribner RG, Duval TB, Beare JP, Sydorak GR,    Rosenman JE, et al. The cell-saver and autologous transfusion: an    underutilized resource in vascular surgery. Am J Surg 1986;152:105-9.    45. Drudi LM, Ades M, Mancini R, Boudrias C, Obrand DI, Steinmetz OK,    et al. Frailty assessment in older adults undergoing interventions for    peripheral arterial disease. J Vasc Surg 2019;70:1594-602.e1.    46. Rothenberg KA, George EL, Trickey AW, Barreto NB,    Johnson TM 2nd, Hall DE, et al. Assessment of the risk analysis index    for prediction of mortality, major complications, and length of stay    in patients who underwent vascular surgery. Ann Vasc Surg    2020;66:442-53.    47. Eslami MH, Saadeddin Z, Rybin DV, Doros G, Siracuse JJ, Farber A.    Association of frailty index with perioperative mortality and inhospital morbidity after elective lower extremity bypass. J Vasc    Surg 2019;69:863-74.e1.    48. Takeji Y, Yamaji K, Tomoi Y, Okazaki J, Tanaka K, Nagae A, et al.    Impact of frailty on clinical outcomes in patients with critical limb    ischemia. Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2018;11:e006778.    49. Partridge JSL, Harari D, Martin FC, Peacock JL, Bell R, Mohammed A,    et al. Randomized clinical trial of comprehensive geriatric assessment and optimization in vascular surgery. Br J Surg 2017;104:    679-87.    50. Alvarez-Nebreda ML, Bentov N, Urman RD, Setia S, Huang JC,    Pfeifer K, et al. Recommendations for preoperative management of    frailty from the society for perioperative assessment and quality    improvement (SPAQI). J Clin Anesth 2018;47:33-42.    51. Palmer J, Pymer S, Smith GE, Harwood AE, Ingle L, Huang C, et al.    Presurgery exercise-based conditioning interventions (prehabilitation) in adults undergoing lower limb surgery for peripheral arterial disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;9:    CD013407.    52. Crowner JR, Marston WA, Freeman NLB, Sperger J, Austin HD,    Steffan M, et al. The Society for Vascular Surgery Objective Performance Goals for Critical Limb Ischemia are attainable in select    patients with ischemic wounds managed with wound care alone.    Ann Vasc Surg 2022;78:28-35.    53. Setacci C. Time is tissue. J Endovasc Ther 2012;19:515-6.    54. Conte MS, Bradbury AW, Kolh P, White JV, Dick F, Fitridge R, et al.    Global vascular guidelines on the management of chronic limbthreatening ischemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2019;58:S1-109.    e33.    55. Visser L, Prent A, Banning LBD, van Leeuwen BL, Zeebregts CJ,    Pol RA. Risk factors for delirium after vascular surgery: a systematic    review and meta-analysis. Ann Vasc Surg 2021;76:500-13.    56. van Eijsden WA, Raats JW, Mulder PG, van der Laan L. New aspects    of delirium in elderly patients with critical limb ischemia. Clin Interv    Aging 2015;10:1537-46.    57. Katznelson R, Djaiani G, Mitsakakis N, Lindsay TF, Tait G, Friedman Z,    et al. Delirium following vascular surgery: increased incidence with    preoperative beta-blocker administration. Can J Anaesth 2009;56:    793-801.    58. Sasajima Y, Sasajima T, Azuma N, Akazawa K, Saito Y, Inaba M, et al.    Factors related to postoperative delirium in patients with lower    limb ischaemia: a prospective cohort study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc    Surg 2012;44:411-5.    59. Visser L, Prent A, van der Laan MJ, van Leeuwen BL, Izaks GJ,    Zeebregts CJ, et al. Predicting postoperative delirium after vascular    surgical procedures. J Vasc Surg 2015;62:183-9.    60. Simoes V, Carvalho R, Duarte C, Fragata I. Postoperative delirium    after vascular surgery. Rev Port Cir Cardiotorac Vasc 2015;22:219-23.    61. Styra R, Larsen E, Dimas MA, Baston D, Elgie-Watson J, Flockhart L,    et al. The effect of preoperative cognitive impairment and type of    vascular surgery procedure on postoperative delirium with associated cost implications. J Vasc Surg 2019;69:201-9.    62. Lee DS, Lee MY, Park CM, Kim DI, Kim YW, Park YJ. Preoperative    statins are associated with a reduced risk of postoperative delirium    following vascular surgery. PLoS One 2018;13:e0192841.    63. Roijers JP, Rakke YS, Hopmans CJ, Buimer MG, de Groot HGW,    Ho GH, et al. Incidence and risk factors for delirium in elderly patients with critical limb ischaemia. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg    2020;59:598-605.    64. Sasajima Y, Sasajima T, Uchida H, Kawai S, Haga M, Akasaka N, et al.    Postoperative delirium in patients with chronic lower limb    ischaemia: what are the specific markers? Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg    2000;20:132-7.    65. Peden CJ, Miller TR, Deiner SG, Eckenhoff RG, Fleisher LA. Members    of the Perioperative Brain Health Expert P. Improving perioperative    brain health: an expert consensus review of key actions for the    perioperative care team. Br J Anaesth 2021;126:423-32.    66. Grenon SM, Hiramoto J, Smolderen KG, Vittinghoff E, Whooley MA,    Cohen BE. Association between depression and peripheral artery    disease: insights from the heart and soul study. J Am Heart Assoc    2012;1:e002667.    67. Smolderen KG, Hoeks SE, Pedersen SS, van Domburg RT, de L II,    Poldermans D. Lower-leg symptoms in peripheral arterial disease    are associated with anxiety, depression, and anhedonia. Vasc Med    2009;14:297-304.    16 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    68. Brostow DP, Petrik ML, Starosta AJ, Waldo SW. Depression in patients with peripheral arterial disease: a systematic review. Eur J    Cardiovasc Nurs 2017;16:181-93.    69. Ruo B, Liu K, Tian L, Tan J, Ferrucci L, Guralnik JM, et al. Persistent    depressive symptoms and functional decline among patients with    peripheral arterial disease. Psychosom Med 2007;69:415-24.    70. Cherr GS, Wang J, Zimmerman PM, Dosluoglu HH. Depression    is associated with worse patency and recurrent leg symptoms    after lower extremity revascularization. J Vasc Surg 2007;45:    744-50.    71. Hernandez NV, Ramirez JL, Khetani SA, Spaulding KA, Gasper WJ,    Hiramoto J, et al. Depression severity is associated with increased    inflammation in veterans with peripheral artery disease. Vasc Med    2018;23:445-53.    72. Arya S, Lee S, Zahner GJ, Cohen BE, Hiramoto J, Wolkowitz OM, et al.    The association of comorbid depression with mortality and amputation in veterans with peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg    2018;68:536-45.e2.    73. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, Cushman M, Das SR, Deo R, et al.    Heart disease and stroke statistics-2017 update: a report from the    American heart association. Circulation 2017;135:e146-603.    74. Kalbaugh CA, Loehr L, Wruck L, Lund JL, Matsushita K,    Bengtson LGS, et al. Frequency of care and mortality following an    incident diagnosis of peripheral artery disease in the inpatient or    outpatient setting: the ARIC (atherosclerosis risk in Communities)    study. J Am Heart Assoc 2018;7:e007332.    75. Kalbaugh CA, Gonzalez NJ, Luckett DJ, Fine J, Brothers TE,    Farber MA, et al. The impact of current smoking on outcomes after    infrainguinal bypass for claudication. J Vasc Surg 2018;68:495-502.e1.    76. Young JC, Paul NJ, Karatas TB, Kondrasov SA, McGinigle KL,    Crowner JR, et al. Cigarette smoking intensity informs outcomes    after open revascularization for peripheral artery disease. J Vasc    Surg 2019;70:1973-83.e5.    77. Hughes JR, Stead LF, Hartmann-Boyce J, Cahill K, Lancaster T. Antidepressants for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev    2014:CD000031.    78. Wong J, An D, Urman RD, Warner DO, Tonnesen H, Raveendran R,    et al. Society for perioperative assessment and quality improvement    (SPAQI) consensus statement on perioperative smoking cessation.    Anesth Analg 2020;131:955-68.    79. Goodney PP, Spangler EL, Newhall K, Brooke BS, Schanzer A,    Tan TW, et al. Feasibility and pilot efficacy of a brief smoking    cessation intervention delivered by vascular surgeons in the    Vascular Physician Offer and Report (VAPOR) Trial. J Vasc Surg    2017;65:1152-60.e2.    80. Newhall K, Suckow B, Spangler E, Brooke BS, Schanzer A, Tan TW,    et al. Impact and duration of brief surgeon-delivered smoking    cessation advice on attitudes regarding nicotine dependence and    Tobacco harms for patients with peripheral arterial disease. Ann    Vasc Surg 2017;38:113-21.    81. Wong J, Lam DP, Abrishami A, Chan MT, Chung F. Short-term preoperative smoking cessation and postoperative complications: a    systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anes 2012;59:268-79.    82. Tonnesen H, Nielsen PR, Lauritzen JB, Moller AM. Smoking and    alcohol intervention before surgery: evidence for best practice. Br J    Anaesth 2009;102:297-306.    83. Sorensen LT. Wound healing and infection in surgery: the pathophysiological impact of smoking, smoking cessation, and nicotine    replacement therapy: a systematic review. Ann Surg 2012;255:    1069-79.    84. Oppedal K, M?ller AM, Pedersen B, T?nnesen H. Preoperative    alcohol cessation prior to elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst    Rev 2012:CD008343.    85. Shabanzadeh DM, Sorensen LT. Alcohol consumption increases    post-operative infection but not mortality: a systematic review and    meta-analysis. Surg Infect 2015;16:657-68.    86. Verwer MC, Wijnand JGJ, Teraa M, Gremmels H, Simons JP,    Conte MS, et al. External validation of the Vascular Quality Initiative    prediction model for survival in no-option chronic limb-threatening    ischemia patients. J Vasc Surg 2020;72:1659-66.e1.    87. Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Wilson PW, D・Agostino R Sr, Ohman EM, Rother J,    et al. One-year cardiovascular event rates in outpatients with    atherothrombosis. JAMA 2007;297:1197-206.    88. Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, Thomas EJ, Polanczyk CA,    Cook EF, et al. Derivation and prospective validation of a simple    index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery.    Circulation 1999;100:1043-9.    89. Gupta PK, Gupta H, Sundaram A, Kaushik M, Fang X, Miller WJ, et al.    Development and validation of a risk calculator for prediction of    cardiac risk after surgery. Circulation 2011;124:381-7.    90. Bertges DJ, Neal D, Schanzer A, Scali ST, Goodney PP, EldrupJorgensen J, et al. The vascular quality initiative cardiac risk index for    prediction of myocardial infarction after vascular surgery. J Vasc    Surg 2016;64:1411-21.e4.    91. Surveillance report 2018 e Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment    and reduction, including lipid modification (2014) NICE guideline    CG181 [Internet]. London: National Institute for Health and Care    Excellence (NICE); 2018. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/    books/NBK550918/. Accessed March 22, 2023.    92. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA,    Beckman JA, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients    undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of    Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice    guidelines. Circulation 2014;130:e278-333.    93. von Meijenfeldt GCI, Rydingsward JE, van der Laan MJ,    Zeebregts CJ, Christopher KB. Functional status and out-of-hospital    outcomes in different types of vascular surgery patients. Ann Vasc    Surg 2021;75:461-70.    94. McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, Goldman S, Krupski WC, Littooy F,    et al. Coronary-artery revascularization before elective major    vascular surgery. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2795-804.    95. Poldermans D, Schouten O, Vidakovic R, Bax JJ, Thomson IR,    Hoeks SE, et al. A clinical randomized trial to evaluate the safety of a    noninvasive approach in high-risk patients undergoing major    vascular surgery: the DECREASE-V Pilot Study. J Am Coll Cardiol    2007;49:1763-9.    96. Garcia S, Moritz TE, Ward HB, Pierpont G, Goldman S, Larsen GC,    et al. Usefulness of revascularization of patients with multivessel    coronary artery disease before elective vascular surgery for    abdominal aortic and peripheral occlusive disease. Am J Cardiol    2008;102:809-13.    97. Cooper BG. An update on contraindications for lung function    testing. Thorax 2011;66:714-23.    98. Arozullah AM, Daley J, Henderson WG, Khuri SF. Multifactorial risk    index for predicting postoperative respiratory failure in men after    major noncardiac surgery. The National Veterans Administration    Surgical Quality Improvement Program. Ann Surg 2000;232:    242-53.    99. Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, Hornbake ER, Lawrence VA,    Smetana GW, et al. Risk assessment for and strategies to reduce    perioperative pulmonary complications for patients undergoing    noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the American College    of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:575-80.    100. Latifi N, Grady D. Moving beyond guidelines-use of value-based    preoperative testing. JAMA Intern Med 2021;181:1431-2.    101. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, Eberhardt MS, Flegal KM,    Engelgau MM, et al. Prevalence of diabetes and impaired fasting    glucose in adults in the U.S. population: national Health and    Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2002. Diabetes Care 2006;29:    1263-8.    102. Duwayri Y, Jordan WD Jr. Diabetes, dysglycemia, and vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2020;71:701-11.    103. Hingorani A, LaMuraglia GM, Henke P, Meissner MH, Loretz L,    Zinszer KM, et al. The management of diabetic foot: a clinical    practice guideline by the society for vascular surgery in collaboration with the American podiatric medical association and the society for vascular medicine. J Vasc Surg 2016;63(2 Suppl):3S-21S.    104. Jude EB, Oyibo SO, Chalmers N, Boulton AJ. Peripheral arterial    disease in diabetic and nondiabetic patients: a comparison of    severity and outcome. Diabetes Care 2001;24:1433-7.    105. Dua A, Lee CJ. Epidemiology of peripheral arterial disease and    critical limb ischemia. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol 2016;19:91-5.    106. Biancari F, Salenius JP, Heikkinen M, Luther M, Ylonen K,    Lepantalo M. Risk-scoring method for prediction of 30-day postoperative outcome after infrainguinal surgical revascularization for    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 17    Volume -, Number -    critical lower-limb ischemia: a Finnvasc registry study. World J Surg    2007;31:217-25; discussion 26-7.    107. Hicks CW, Najafian A, Farber A, Menard MT, Malas MB, Black JH 3rd,    et al. Diabetes does not worsen outcomes following infrageniculate    bypass or endovascular intervention for patients with critical limb    ischemia. J Vasc Surg 2016;64:1667-74.e1.    108. Melliere D, Berrahal D, Desgranges P, Allaire E, Becquemin JP,    Perlemuter L, et al. Influence of diabetes on revascularisation procedures of the aorta and lower limb arteries: early results. Eur J Vasc    Endovasc Surg 1999;17:438-41.    109. Malmstedt J, Leander K, Wahlberg E, Karlstrom L, Alfredsson L,    Swedenborg J. Outcome after leg bypass surgery for critical limb    ischemia is poor in patients with diabetes: a population-based    cohort study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:887-92.    110. Wolfle KD, Bruijnen H, Loeprecht H, Rumenapf G, Schweiger H,    Grabitz K, et al. Graft patency and clinical outcome of femorodistal    arterial reconstruction in diabetic and non-diabetic patients: results    of a multicentre comparative analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg    2003;25:229-34.    111. Kotagal M, Symons RG, Hirsch IB, Umpierrez GE, Dellinger EP,    Farrokhi ET, et al. Perioperative hyperglycemia and risk of adverse    events among patients with and without diabetes. Ann Surg    2015;261:97-103.    112. Frisch A, Chandra P, Smiley D, Peng L, Rizzo M, Gatcliffe C, et al.    Prevalence and clinical outcome of hyperglycemia in the perioperative period in noncardiac surgery. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1783-8.    113. Arya S, Binney ZO, Khakharia A, Long CA, Brewster LP, Wilson PW,    et al. High hemoglobin A1c associated with increased adverse limb    events in peripheral arterial disease patients undergoing revascularization. J Vasc Surg 2018;67:217-28.e1.    114. McGinigle KL, Kindell DG, Strassle PD, Crowner JR, Pascarella L,    Farber MA, et al. Poor glycemic control is associated with significant    increase in major limb amputation and adverse events in the 30-    day postoperative period after infrainguinal bypass. J Vasc Surg    2020;72:987-94.    115. Pippitt K, Li M, Gurgle HE. Diabetes mellitus: screening and diagnosis. Am Fam Physician 2016;93:103-9.    116. Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Grunberger G, Umpierrez G,    Zimmerman RS, Bailey TS, et al. American association of clinical    endocrinologists and American College of endocrinologyVclinical    practice guidelines for developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care planV2015Vexecutive summary. Endocr Pract 2015;21:    413-37.    117. Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study G,    Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, Goff DC Jr, Bigger JT, et al.    Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J    Med 2008;358:2545-59.    118. Duggan EW, Carlson K, Umpierrez GE. Perioperative hyperglycemia    management: an update. Anesthesiology 2017;126:547-60.    119. Oscarsson A, Gupta A, Fredrikson M, Jarhult J, Nystrom M,    Pettersson E, et al. To continue or discontinue aspirin in the perioperative period: a randomized, controlled clinical trial. Br J    Anaesth 2010;104:305-12.    120. Feringa HHH, Bax JJ, Karagiannis SE, Noordzij P, van Domburg R,    Klein J, et al. Elderly patients undergoing major vascular surgery:    risk factors and medication associated with risk reduction. Arch    Gerontol Geriatr 2009;48:116-20.    121. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, Fleisher LA, et al.    2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of    the American College of Cardiology/American heart association    Task Force on clinical practice guidelines: an update of the 2011    ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention,    2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery,    2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart    disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of STelevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the    management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary    syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing    noncardiac surgery. Circulation 2016;134:e123-55.    122. Holcomb CN, Graham LA, Richman JS, Rhyne RR, Itani KMF,    Maddox TM, et al. The incremental risk of noncardiac surgery on    adverse cardiac events following coronary stenting. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64:2730-9.    123. Holcomb CN, Hollis RH, Graham LA, Richman JS, Valle JA, Itani KM,    et al. Association of coronary stent indication with postoperative    outcomes following noncardiac surgery. JAMA Surg 2016;151:462-9.    124. Cruden NL, Harding SA, Flapan AD, Graham C, Wild SH, Slack R,    et al. Previous coronary stent implantation and cardiac events in    patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Circ Cardiovasc Interv    2010;3:236-42.    125. Hawn MT, Graham LA, Richman JS, Itani KM, Henderson WG,    Maddox TM. Risk of major adverse cardiac events following    noncardiac surgery in patients with coronary stents. JAMA 2013;310:    1462-72.    126. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland OAAaRAUMotWPH-GW, Cook T, Gill H, Hill D, Ingram M, Makris M,    Malhotra S, et al. Regional anaesthesia and patients with abnormalities of coagulation. Anaesthesia 2013;68:966-72.    127. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR,    Benzon HT. Regional anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or Thrombolytic therapy: American society of regional    anesthesia and pain medicine evidence-based guidelines (Fourth    edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med 2018;43:263-309.    128. Spahn DR, Munoz M, Klein AA, Levy JH, Zacharowski K. Patient    blood management: effectiveness and Future potential. Anesthesiology 2020;133:212-22.    129. Bonaca MP, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS, Debus ES, Nehler MR,    Patel MR, et al. Rivaroxaban in peripheral artery disease after    revascularization. N Engl J Med 2020;382:1994-2004.    130. Belch JJ, Dormandy J, Committee CW, Biasi GM, Cairols M, Diehm C,    et al. Results of the randomized, placebo-controlled clopidogrel    and acetylsalicylic acid in bypass surgery for peripheral arterial    disease (CASPAR) trial. J Vasc Surg 2010;52:825-33. 33.e1-2.    131. Bedenis R, Lethaby A, Maxwell H, Acosta S, Prins MH. Antiplatelet    agents for preventing thrombosis after peripheral arterial bypass    surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD000535.    132. Ariesen MJ, Tangelder MJ, Lawson JA, Eikelboom BC, Grobbee DE,    Algra A, et al. Risk of major haemorrhage in patients after infrainguinal venous bypass surgery: therapeutic consequences? The    Dutch BOA (Bypass Oral Anticoagulants or Aspirin) Study. Eur J    Vasc Endovasc Surg 2005;30:154-9.    133. Johnson WC, Williford WO. Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative S. Benefits, morbidity, and mortality associated with longterm administration of oral anticoagulant therapy to patients with    peripheral arterial bypass procedures: a prospective randomized    study. J Vasc Surg 2002;35:413-21.    134. Geraghty AJ, Welch K. Antithrombotic agents for preventing    thrombosis after infrainguinal arterial bypass surgery. Cochrane    Database Syst Rev 2011:CD000536.    135. Johnson WC, Williford WO, Corson JD, Padberg FT Jr. Hemorrhagic    complications during long-term postoperative warfarin administration in patients undergoing lower extremity arterial bypass surgery. Vascular 2004;12:362-8.    136. Sarac TP, Huber TS, Back MR, Ozaki CK, Carlton LM, Flynn TC, et al.    Warfarin improves the outcome of infrainguinal vein bypass grafting at high risk for failure. J Vasc Surg 1998;28:446-57.    137. Jackson MR, Johnson WC, Williford WO, Valentine RJ, Clagett GP.    The effect of anticoagulation therapy and graft selection on the    ischemic consequences of femoropopliteal bypass graft occlusion:    results from a multicenter randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg    2002;35:292-8.    138. Debus ES, Nehler MR, Govsyeyev N, Bauersachs RM, Anand SS,    Patel MR, et al. Effect of rivaroxaban and aspirin in patients with    peripheral artery disease undergoing surgical revascularization:    insights from the VOYAGER PAD trial. Circulation 2021;144:    1104-16.    139. Capell WH, Bonaca MP, Nehler MR, Chen E, Kittelson JM, Anand SS,    et al. Rationale and design for the Vascular Outcomes study of ASA    along with rivaroxaban in endovascular or surgical limb revascularization for peripheral artery disease (VOYAGER PAD). Am Heart J    2018;199:83-91.    140. Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, Smith A, O・Sullivan G, Soreide E, et al.    Perioperative fasting in adults and children: guidelines from the    European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2011;28:    556-69.    18 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    141. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration:    application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an    updated report by the American society of anesthesiologists Task    Force on preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents    to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anesthesiology 2017;126:    376-93.    142. Lidder P, Thomas S, Fleming S, Hosie K, Shaw S, Lewis S.    A randomized placebo controlled trial of preoperative carbohydrate drinks and early postoperative nutritional supplement drinks    in colorectal surgery. Colorectal Dis 2013;15:737-45.    143. Noblett SE, Snowden CP, Shenton BK, Horgan AF. Randomized    clinical trial assessing the effect of Doppler-optimized fluid management on outcome after elective colorectal resection. Br J Surg    2006;93:1069-76.    144. Hausel J, Nygren J, Thorell A, Lagerkranser M, Ljungqvist O. Randomized clinical trial of the effects of oral preoperative carbohydrates on postoperative nausea and vomiting after laparoscopic    cholecystectomy. Br J Surg 2005;92:415-21.    145. Gianotti L, Biffi R, Sandini M, Marrelli D, Vignali A, Caccialanza R,    et al. Preoperative oral carbohydrate load versus placebo in major    elective abdominal surgery (PROCY): a randomized, placebocontrolled, multicenter, phase III trial. Ann Surg 2018;267:623-30.    146. Wang ZG, Wang Q, Wang WJ, Qin HL. Randomized clinical trial to    compare the effects of preoperative oral carbohydrate versus placebo on insulin resistance after colorectal surgery. Br J Surg 2010;97:    317-27.    147. Faria MS, de Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Pimenta OS, Alvarenga LC Jr,    Dock-Nascimento DB, Slhessarenko N. Preoperative fasting of 2    hours minimizes insulin resistance and organic response to trauma    after video-cholecystectomy: a randomized, controlled, clinical trial.    World J Surg 2009;33:1158-64.    148. Rapp-Kesek D, Stridsberg M, Andersson LG, Berne C, Karlsson T.    Insulin resistance after cardiopulmonary bypass in the elderly patient. Scand Cardiovasc J 2007;41:102-8.    149. Noba L, Wakefield A. Are carbohydrate drinks more effective than    preoperative fasting: a systematic review of randomised controlled    trials. J Clin Nurs 2019;28:3096-116.    150. Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L, Herbison GP, Soop M, Nygren J. Preoperative carbohydrate treatment for enhancing recovery after    elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD009161.    151. Albalawi Z, Laffin M, Gramlich L, Senior P, McAlister FA. Enhanced    recovery after surgery (ERAS) in individuals with diabetes: a systematic review. World J Surg 2017;41:1927-34.    152. Ge LN, Wang L, Wang F. Effectiveness and safety of preoperative oral    carbohydrates in enhanced recovery after surgery protocols for    patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Biomed Res Int    2020;2020:5623596.    153. Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, Karanicolas PJ, Arcelus JI, Heit JA,    et al. Prevention of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American    College of chest physicians evidence-based clinical practice    guidelines. Chest 2012;141(2 Suppl):e227S-77S.    154. Rabe D, Partsch H, Heidl G, Hirschl M, Kundi M, Rabe E, et al.    Compression treatment in acute symptomatic proximal deep    venous thrombosis - results of a worldwide survey. Phlebology    2021;36:526-34.    155. Rabe E, Partsch H, Morrison N, Meissner MH, Mosti G, Lattimer CR,    et al. Risks and contraindications of medical compression treatment - a critical reappraisal. An international consensus statement.    Phlebology 2020;35:447-60.    156. Ip HY, Abrishami A, Peng PW, Wong J, Chung F. Predictors of    postoperative pain and analgesic consumption: a qualitative systematic review. Anesthesiology 2009;111:657-77.    157. By the American geriatrics society beers criteria update expert P.    American geriatrics society 2015 updated beers criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc    2015;63:2227-46.    158. Gaulton TG, Wunsch H, Gaskins LJ, Leonard CE, Hennessy S,    Ashburn M, et al. Preoperative sedative-hypnotic medication use    and adverse postoperative outcomes. Ann Surg 2019;274:e108-14.    159. Wongkietkachorn A, Wongkietkachorn N, Rhunsiri P. Preoperative    needs-based education to reduce anxiety, increase satisfaction, and    decrease time spent in day surgery: a randomized controlled trial.    World J Surg 2018;42:666-74.    160. Itoga NK, Sceats LA, Stern JR, Mell MW. Association of opioid use    and peripheral artery disease. J Vasc Surg 2019;70:1271-9.e1.    161. Seretny M, Colvin LA. Pain management in patients with vascular    disease. Br J Anaesth 2016;117(Suppl 2):ii95-106.    162. Gustafsson U, Scott M, Schwenk W, Demartines N, Roulin D,    Francis N, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colonic    surgery: enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations. World J Surg 2013;37:259-84.    163. Mitra S, Sinatra RS. Perioperative management of acute pain in the    opioid-dependent patient. Anesthesiology 2004;101:212-27.    164. Harrison TK, Kornfeld H, Aggarwal AK, Lembke A. Perioperative    considerations for the patient with opioid use disorder on buprenorphine, methadone, or Naltrexone maintenance therapy. Anesthesiol Clin 2018;36:345-59.    165. O・Rourke MJ, Keshock MC, Boxhorn CE, Correll DJ, O・Glasser AY,    Gazelka HM, et al. Preoperative management of opioid and Nonopioid analgesics: society for perioperative assessment and quality    improvement (SPAQI) consensus statement. Mayo Clin Proc    2021;96:1325-41.    166. Daryapeyma A, Ostlund O, Wahlgren CM. Healthcare-associated    infections after lower extremity revascularization. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2014;48:72-7.    167. van der Slegt J, van der Laan L, Veen EJ, Hendriks Y, Romme J,    Kluytmans J. Implementation of a bundle of care to reduce surgical    site infections in patients undergoing vascular surgery. PLoS One    2013;8:e71566.    168. Hekman KE, Michel E, Blay E Jr, Helenowski IB, Hoel AW. Evidencebased bundled quality improvement intervention for reducing    surgical site infection in lower extremity vascular bypass procedures. J Am Coll Surg 2019;228:44-53.    169. Almeida CE, Reis L, Carvalho L, Almeida CM. Costa Costa Collagen    implant with gentamicin sulphate reduces surgical site infection in    vascular surgery: a prospective cohort study. Int J Surg Lond Engl    2014;12:1100-4.    170. Turtiainen J, Saimanen EI, Makinen KT, Nykanen AI, Venermo MA,    Uurto IT, et al. Effect of triclosan-coated sutures on the incidence of    surgical wound infection after lower limb revascularization surgery:    a randomized controlled trial. World J Surg 2012;36:2528-34.    171. Darouiche RO, Wall MJ Jr, Itani KM, Otterson MF, Webb AL,    Carrick MM, et al. Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidone-iodine for    surgical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:18-26.    172. Earnshaw JJ. Prevention of infection after vascular reconstruction.    J Antimicrob Chemother 1989;23:480-3.    173. Fernandez-Prada M, Martinez-Ortega C, Revuelta-Marino L,    Menendez-Herrero A, Navarro-Gracia JF. Evaluation of the bundle    "Zero surgical site infection" to prevent surgical site infection in    vascular surgery. Ann Vasc Surg 2017;41:160-8.    174. Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K. Preoperative hair removal to reduce    surgical site infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:    CD004122.    175. Leaper D, Burman-Roy S, Palanca A, Cullen K, Worster D, GautamAitken E, et al. Prevention and treatment of surgical site infection:    summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 2008;337:a1924.    176. Stewart A, Eyers PS, Earnshaw JJ. Prevention of infection in arterial    reconstruction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006:CD003073.    177. Edwards FH, Engelman RM, Houck P, Shahian DM, Bridges CR,    Society of Thoracic S. The society of Thoracic surgeons practice    guideline series: antibiotic prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, Part I:    duration. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;81:397-404.    178. Zanetti G, Giardina R, Platt R. Intraoperative redosing of cefazolin    and risk for surgical site infection in cardiac surgery. Emerg Infect    Dis 2001;7:828-31.    179. Bratzler DW, Houck PM. Surgical Infection Prevention Guidelines    Writers W, American Academy of Orthopaedic S, American Association of Critical Care N, American Association of Nurse A, et al.    Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery: an advisory statement from    the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis    2004;38:1706-15.    180. Swoboda SM, Merz C, Kostuik J, Trentler B, Lipsett PA. Does intraoperative blood loss affect antibiotic serum and tissue concentrations? Arch Surg 1996;131:1165-71; discussion 71-2.    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 19    Volume -, Number -    181. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, Chung F, Diemunsch P, Habib AS, et al.    Fourth consensus guidelines for the management of postoperative    nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2020;131:441-8.    182. Apfel CC, Laara E, Koivuranta M, Greim CA, Roewer N. A simplified    risk score for predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting: conclusions from cross-validations between two centers. Anesthesiology 1999;91:693-700.    183. Koivuranta M, Laara E, Snare L, Alahuhta S. A survey of postoperative    nausea and vomiting. Anaesthesia 1997;52:443-9.    184. Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, Kerger H, Turan A, Vedder I, et al.    A factorial trial of six interventions for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2441-51.    185. Liu SS, Strodtbeck WM, Richman JM, Wu CL. A comparison of    regional versus general anesthesia for ambulatory anesthesia: a    meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesth Analg    2005;101:1634-42.    186. Apfel CC, Turan A, Souza K, Pergolizzi J, Hornuss C. Intravenous    acetaminophen reduces postoperative nausea and vomiting: a    systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2013;154:677-89.    187. Elia N, Lysakowski C, Tramer MR. Does multimodal analgesia with    acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, or selective    cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and patient-controlled analgesia    morphine offer advantages over morphine alone? Meta-analyses of    randomized trials. Anesthesiology 2005;103:1296-304.    188. Cao X, White PF, Ma H. An update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. J Anesth 2017;31:617-26.    189. Kaye AD, Cornett EM, Chalabi J, Naim NZ, Novitch MB, Creel JB,    et al. Pharmacology of antiemetics: update and current considerations in anesthesia practice. Anesthesiol Clin 2017;35:e41-54.    190. Lundorff L, Dich-Nielsen JO, Laugesen H, Jensen MM. Single-dose    spinal anaesthesia versus incremental dosing for lower limb    vascular surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1999;43:405-10.    191. Thompson JPTG. Anaesthesia for lower limb revascularization.    Continuing Education Anaesth Crit Care Pain 2005;5:89-92.    192. Traynor C, Hall GM. Endocrine and metabolic changes during surgery: anaesthetic implications. Br J Anaesth 1981;53:153-60.    193. Cook PT, Davies MJ, Cronin KD, Moran P. A prospective randomised    trial comparing spinal anaesthesia using hyperbaric cinchocaine    with general anaesthesia for lower limb vascular surgery. Anaesth    Intensive Care 1986;14:373-80.    194. Wahba WM, Don HF, Craig DB. Post-operative epidural analgesia:    effects on lung volumes. Can Anaesth Soc J 1975;22:519-27.    195. Baron JF, Coriat P, Mundler O, Fauchet M, Bousseau D, Viars P. Left    ventricular global and regional function during lumbar epidural    anesthesia in patients with and without angina pectoris. Influence    of volume loading. Anesthesiology 1987;66:621-7.    196. Cousins MJ, Wright CJ. Graft, muscle, skin blood flow after epidural    block in vascular surgical procedures. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1971;133:    59-64.    197. Modig J, Borg T, Karlstrom G, Maripuu E, Sahlstedt B. Thromboembolism after total hip replacement: role of epidural and general    anesthesia. Anesth Analg 1983;62:174-80.    198. Christopherson R, Beattie C, Frank SM, Norris EJ, Meinert CL,    Gottlieb SO, et al. Perioperative morbidity in patients randomized    to epidural or general anesthesia for lower extremity vascular surgery. Perioperative Ischemia Randomized Anesthesia Trial Study    Group. Anesthesiology 1993;79:422-34.    199. Bode RH, Lewis KP, Zarich SW, Pierce ET, Roberts M,    Kowalchuk GJ, et al. Cardiac outcome after peripheral vascular    surgery. Comparison of general and regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1996;84:3-13.    200. Rivers SP, Scher LA, Sheehan E, Veith FJ. Epidural versus general    anesthesia for infrainguinal arterial reconstruction. J Vasc Surg    1991;14:764-8; discussion 8-70.    201. Yazigi A, Madi-Gebara S, Haddad F, Hayeck G, Tabet G. Intraoperative myocardial ischemia in peripheral vascular surgery: general anesthesia vs combined sciatic and femoral nerve blocks. J Clin    Anesth 2005;17:499-503.    202. Hollmann MW, Rathmell JP, Lirk P. Optimal postoperative pain    management: redefining the role for opioids. Lancet 2019;393:    1483-5.    203. Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, Forbes A, Peyton P, Story D, et al.    Restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major abdominal surgery.    N Engl J Med 2018;378:2263-74.    204. Hasanin A, Mourad KH, Farouk I, Refaat S, Nabih A, Raouf SA, et al.    The impact of goal-directed fluid therapy in prolonged major    abdominal surgery on extravascular lung Water and oxygenation: a    randomized controlled trial. Open Access Maced J Med Sci 2019;7:    1276-81.    205. Resalt-Pereira M, Munoz JL, Miranda E, Cuquerella V, Perez A. Goaldirected fluid therapy on laparoscopic colorectal surgery within    enhanced recovery after surgery program. Efecto de la fluidoterapia    guiada por objetivos en cirugia colorrectal laparoscopica dentro de    un protocolo de rehabilitacion multimodal. Rev Esp Anestesiol    Reanim 2019;66:259-66.    206. Feng S, Yang S, Xiao W, Wang X, Yang K, Wang T. Effects of    perioperative goal-directed fluid therapy combined with the    application of alpha-1 adrenergic agonists on postoperative outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Anesthesiol    2018;18:113.    207. Wesselink EM, Kappen TH, Torn HM, Slooter AJC, van Klei WA.    Intraoperative hypotension and the risk of postoperative adverse    outcomes: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth 2018;121:706-21.    208. van Waes JA, van Klei WA, Wijeysundera DN, van Wolfswinkel L,    Lindsay TF, Beattie WS. Association between intraoperative hypotension and myocardial injury after vascular surgery. Anesthesiology    2016;124:35-44.    209. Hypothermia: prevention and management in adults having surgery. London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence    (NICE); 2016. (NICE Clinical Guidelines, No. 65). Available at: https://    www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554181/. Accessed March 22, 2023.    210. Shantikumar S, Patel S, Handa A. The role of cell salvage autotransfusion in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. Eur J Vasc    Endovasc Surg 2011;42:577-84.    211. Takagi H, Sekino S, Kato T, Matsuno Y, Umemoto T. Intraoperative    autotransfusion in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery: metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Surg 2007;142:1098-101.    212. Klein AA, Bailey CR, Charlton AJ, Evans E, Guckian-Fisher M,    McCrossan R, et al. Association of Anaesthetists guidelines: cell    salvage for peri-operative blood conservation 2018. Anaesthesia    2018;73:1141-50.    213. Goodnough LT, Monk TG, Sicard G, Satterfield SA, Allen B,    Anderson CB, et al. Intraoperative salvage in patients undergoing    elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: an analysis of cost and    benefit. J Vasc Surg 1996;24:213-8.    214. van de Weijer MA, Kruse RR, Schamp K, Zeebregts CJ, Reijnen MM.    Morbidity of femoropopliteal bypass surgery. Semin Vasc Surg    2015;28:112-21.    215. Kuy S, Dua A, Desai S, Dua A, Patel B, Tondravi N, et al. Surgical site    infections after lower extremity revascularization procedures    involving groin incisions. Ann Vasc Surg 2014;28:53-8.    216. Canteras M, Baptista-Silva JC, do Carmo Novaes F, Cacione DG.    Transverse versus vertical groin incision for femoral artery approach.    Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;4:CD013153.    217. Ng JJ, Tan JKH, Lee JWK, Choong A. Longitudinal versus transverse    incision for common femoral artery exposure: a systematic review    and meta-analysis. ANZ J Surg 2021;91:822-31.    218. Sway A, Solomkin JS, Pittet D, Kilpatrick C. Methodology and    background for the World health organization global guidelines on    the prevention of surgical site infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt)    2018;19:33-9.    219. Gwilym BL, Dovell G, Dattani N, Ambler GK, Shalhoub J,    Forsythe RO, et al. Editor・s choice - systematic review and metaanalysis of wound adjuncts for the prevention of groin wound surgical site infection in arterial surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg    2021;61:636-46.    220. Kwon J, Staley C, McCullough M, Goss S, Arosemena M, Abai B, et al.    A randomized clinical trial evaluating negative pressure therapy to    decrease vascular groin incision complications. J Vasc Surg 2018;68:    1744-52.    221. Matatov T, Reddy KN, Doucet LD, Zhao CX, Zhang WW. Experience    with a new negative pressure incision management system in    prevention of groin wound infection in vascular surgery patients.    J Vasc Surg 2013;57:791-5.    222. Lee K, Murphy PB, Ingves MV, Duncan A, DeRose G, Dubois L, et al.    Randomized clinical trial of negative pressure wound therapy for    high-risk groin wounds in lower extremity revascularization. J Vasc    Surg 2017;66:1814-9.    20 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery    --- 2023    223. Bua N, Smith GE, Totty JP, Pan D, Wallace T, Carradice D, et al.    Dialkylcarbamoyl Chloride dressings in the prevention of surgical    site infections after Nonimplant vascular surgery. Ann Vasc Surg    2017;44:387-92.    224. Healy D, Clarke-Moloney M, Hannigan A, Walsh S. Wound drainage    for lower limb arterial surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;11:    CD011111.    225. Bennett KM, Levinson H, Scarborough JE, Shortell CK. Validated    prediction model for severe groin wound infection after lower extremity revascularization procedures. J Vasc Surg 2016;63:414-9.    226. Wallace AB, Piper ML, Holland M, Lee S, Orringer M, Eichler C, et al.    Prophylactic muscle flaps in primary vascular procedures of the    groin. Ann Vasc Surg 2022;78:77-83.    227. Teixeira PG, Woo K, Weaver FA, Rowe VL. Vein harvesting technique    for infrainguinal arterial bypass with great saphenous vein and its    association with surgical site infection and graft patency. J Vasc    Surg 2015;61:1264-71.e2.    228. Santo VJ, Dargon PT, Azarbal AF, Liem TK, Mitchell EL, Moneta GL,    et al. Open versus endoscopic great saphenous vein harvest for    lower extremity revascularization of critical limb ischemia. J Vasc    Surg 2014;59:427-34.    229. Peinado Cebrian J, Flores Herrero A, Salgado Lopetegui CL, Lamarca    Mendoza MP, Montoya Ching R, Seco SE, et al. Comparison of    bypass with endoscopically harvested internal saphenous vein    versus bypass with surgically harvested internal saphenous vein for    lower limb arterial disease. Ann Vasc Surg 2015;29:1353-62.    230. Fereydooni A, Zhou B, Xu Y, Deng Y, Dardik A, Ochoa Chaar CI.    Rapid increase in hybrid surgery for the treatment of peripheral    artery disease in the Vascular Quality Initiative database. J Vasc Surg    2020;72:977-86.e1.    231. DeCarlo C, Boitano LT, Sumpio B, Latz CA, Feldman Z, Pendleton AA,    et al. Comparative analysis of outcomes in patients undergoing    femoral endarterectomy plus endovascular (hybrid) or bypass for    femoropopliteal occlusive disease. Ann Vasc Surg 2021;72:227-36.    232. Jorshery SD, Skrip L, Sarac T, Ochoa Chaar CI. Hybrid femoropopliteal procedures are associated with improved perioperative    outcomes compared with bypass. J Vasc Surg 2018;68:1447-54.e5.    233. Elbadawy A, Ali H, Saleh M. Midterm outcomes of common femoral    endarterectomy combined with inflow and outflow endovascular    treatment for chronic limb threatening ischaemia. Eur J Vasc    Endovasc Surg 2020;59:947-55.    234. Nesek-Adam V, Rasic Z, Schwarz D, Grizelj-Stojci  c E, Rasi  c D,     Krstonijevic Z, et al. The effect of spinal versus general anesthesia on     postoperative pain and analgesic requirements in patients undergoing peripheral vascular surgery. Coll Antropol 2012;36:1301-5.    235. Chou R, Gordon DB, de Leon-Casasola OA, Rosenberg JM, Bickler S,    Brennan T, et al. Management of postoperative pain: a clinical    practice guideline from the American pain society, the American    society of regional anesthesia and pain medicine, and the American    society of anesthesiologists・ Committee on regional anesthesia,    executive Committee, and administrative Council. J Pain 2016;17:    131-57.    236. Bell RF, Dahl JB, Moore RA, Kalso E. Perioperative ketamine for    acute postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006:    CD004603.    237. Blaudszun G, Lysakowski C, Elia N, Tramer MR. Effect of perioperative systemic alpha2 agonists on postoperative morphine    consumption and pain intensity: systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesthesiology 2012;116:    1312-22.    238. Howard R, Albright J, Englesbe M, Osborne N, Henke P. Opioid use    in patients with peripheral arterial disease undergoing lower extremity bypass. J Vasc Surg 2022;75:998-1007.    239. Velazquez-Ramirez G, Krebs J, Stafford JM, Ur R, Craven TE,    Stutsrim AE, et al. Prevalence of chronic opioid use in patients with    peripheral arterial disease undergoing revascularization. J Vasc Surg    2022;75:186-94.    240. Long CA, Fang ZB, Hu FY, Arya S, Brewster LP, Duggan E, et al. Poor    glycemic control is a strong predictor of postoperative morbidity    and mortality in patients undergoing vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg    2019;69:1219-26.    241. Conte MS, Pomposelli FB. Society for Vascular Surgery Practice    guidelines for atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower extremities management of asymptomatic disease and claudication.    Introduction. J Vasc Surg 2015;61(3 Suppl):1S.    242. American Diabetes Association Professional Practice C, American    Diabetes Association Professional Practice C, Draznin B, Aroda VR,    Bakris G, Benson G, et al. 16. Diabetes care in the hospital: standards    of medical care in diabetes-2022. Diabetes Care 2022;45(Supplement_1):S244-53.    243. Umpierrez GE, Hellman R, Korytkowski MT, Kosiborod M,    Maynard GA, Montori VM, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in    hospitalized patients in non-critical care setting: an endocrine society    clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:16-38.    244. Subramaniam B, Panzica PJ, Novack V, Mahmood F, Matyal R,    Mitchell JD, et al. Continuous perioperative insulin infusion decreases major cardiovascular events in patients undergoing    vascular surgery: a prospective, randomized trial. Anesthesiology    2009;110:970-7.    245. Investigators N-SS, Finfer S, Liu B, Chittock DR, Norton R,    Myburgh JA, et al. Hypoglycemia and risk of death in critically ill    patients. N Engl J Med 2012;367:1108-18.    246. Gould CV, Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Kuntz G, Pegues DA.    Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory C, et al. Guideline    for prevention of catheter-associated urinary tract infections 2009.    Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31:319-26.    247. Zil EAA, Patel K, Goldfarb M, Aziz F. Postoperative decline in the    ambulatory function after lower extremity bypass is associated with    higher short and long-term mortality. J Vasc Surg 2022;5:2002-12.    248. Arias-Fernandez P, Romero-Martin M, Gomez-Salgado J, Fernandez-Garcia D. Rehabilitation and early mobilization in the    critical patient: systematic review. J Phys Ther Sci 2018;30:    1193-201.    249. Schallom M, Tymkew H, Vyers K, Prentice D, Sona C, Norris T, et al.    Implementation of an interdisciplinary AACN early mobility protocol. Crit Care Nurse 2020;40:e7-17.    250. Causey MW, Ahmed A, Wu B, Gasper WJ, Reyzelman A,    Vartanian SM, et al. Society for Vascular Surgery limb stage and    patient risk correlate with outcomes in an amputation prevention    program. J Vasc Surg 2016;63:1563-73.e2.    251. Flores AM, Mell MW, Dalman RL, Chandra V. Benefit of multidisciplinary wound care center on the volume and outcomes of a    vascular surgery practice. J Vasc Surg 2019;70:1612-9.    252. Tahhan G, Farber A, Shah NK, Krafcik BM, Sachs TE, Kalish JA, et al.    Characterization of planned and unplanned 30-day readmissions    following vascular surgical procedures. Vasc Endovascular Surg    2017;51:17-22.    253. Knighton A, Martin G, Sounderajah V, Warren L, Markiewicz O,    Riga C, et al. Avoidable 30-day readmissions in patients undergoing    vascular surgery. BJS Open 2019;3:759-66.    254. Eun JC, Nehler MR, Black JH 3rd, Glebova NO. Measures to reduce    unplanned readmissions after vascular surgery. Semin Vasc Surg    2015;28:103-11.    255. Johnson A, Sandford J, Tyndall J. Written and verbal information    versus verbal information only for patients being discharged from    acute hospital settings to home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003:    CD003716.    256. Li LT, Mills WL, Gutierrez AM, Herman LI, Berger DH, Naik AD.    A patient-centered early warning system to prevent readmission    after colorectal surgery: a national consensus using the Delphi    method. J Am Coll Surg 2013;216:210-6.e6.    257. Mistiaen P, Poot E. Telephone follow-up, initiated by a hospitalbased health professional, for postdischarge problems in patients    discharged from hospital to home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev    2006;4:CD004510.    Submitted Dec 5, 2022; accepted Jan 3, 2023.    Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 21    Volume -, Number -