                  Clinical Review & Education

                 JAMA Surgery | Special Communication
                 Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery
                 Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society Recommendations

                 Daniel T. Engelman, MD; Walid Ben Ali, MD; Judson B. Williams, MD, MHS; Louis P. Perrault, MD, PhD;
                 V. Seenu Reddy, MD; Rakesh C. Arora, MD, PhD; Eric E. Roselli, MD; Ali Khoynezhad, MD, PhD; Marc Gerdisch, MD;
                 Jerrold H. Levy, MD; Kevin Lobdell, MD; Nick Fletcher, MD, MBBS; Matthias Kirsch, MD; Gregg Nelson, MD;
                 Richard M. Engelman, MD; Alexander J. Gregory, MD; Edward M. Boyle, MD

                                                                                                         Invited Commentary page 767

                    Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) evidence-based protocols for perioperative care Supplemental content
                    can lead to improvements in clinical outcomes and cost savings. This article aims to present
                                                                                                         CME Quiz at
                    consensus recommendations for the optimal perioperative management of patients       jamanetwork.com/learning
                    undergoing cardiac surgery. A review of meta-analyses, randomized clinical trials, large and CME Questions page 788
                    nonrandomized studies, and reviews was conducted for each protocol element. The quality
                    of the evidence was graded and used to form consensus recommendations for each topic. Author Affiliations: Author
                                                                                                      affiliations are listed at the end of this
                    Development of these recommendations was endorsed by the Enhanced Recovery After
                                                                                                      article.
                    Surgery Society.
                                                                                                      Corresponding Author: Daniel T.
                                                                                                      Engelman, MD, Heart and Vascular
                    JAMA Surg. 2019;154(8):755-766. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2019.1153                    Program, Baystate Medical Center,
                    Published online May 4, 2019.                                                     759 Chestnut St, Springfield, MA
                                                                                                      01199 (daniel.engelman@
                                                                                                      baystatehealth.org).

                        nhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) is a multimodal, As sanctioned by the ERAS Society, we began with a public or-
                        transdisciplinary care improvement initiative to promote re- ganizational meeting in 2017 where broad topics of ERAS in CS were
                        covery of patients undergoing surgery throughout their en- discussed, and we solicited public comment regarding appropriate
                 E                    1
                 tire perioperative journey. These programs aim to reduce compli- approaches and protocols. A multidisciplinary group of 16 cardiac
                 cations and promote an earlier return to normal activities.2,3 The surgeons, anesthesiologists, and intensivists were identified who
                 ERASprotocolshavebeenassociatedwithareductioninoverallcom- demonstrated expertise and experience with ERAS. The group
                 plications and length of stay of up to 50% compared with conven- agreed on 22 potential interventions, divided into preoperative,
                 tional perioperative patient management in populations having non- intraoperative, and postoperative phases of recovery.
                 cardiac surgery.4-6 Evidence-based ERAS protocols have been After selecting topics and assigning group leaders, literature
                 published across multiple surgical specialties.1 In early studies, the searches were conducted according to Preferred Reporting Items for
                 ERAS approach showed promise in cardiac surgery (CS); however, SystematicReviewsandMeta-Analyses(PRISMA)guidelines(Figure),
                 evidence-based protocols have yet to emerge.7            andthisincludedreviews,guidelinedocuments,andstudiesthatwere
                    To address the need for evidence-based ERAS protocols, we conducted on humans since 2000, published in English, and retriev-
                 formed a registered nonprofit organization (ERAS Cardiac Society) ablefromPubMed,ExcerptaMedica(Embase),Cochrane,theAgency
                 to use an evidence-driven process to develop recommendations for forHealthcareResearchandQuality,andotherselecteddatabasesrel-
                 pathways to optimize patient care in CS contexts through collab- evant to this consensus.9 Medical Subject Heading terms were used,
                 orative discovery,analysis, expert consensus, and best practices. The as were accompanying entry terms for the patient group, interven-
                 ERAS Cardiac Society has a formal collaborative agreement with the tions, and outcomes. Two independent reviewers (W.B.A. and 1 non-
                 ERAS Society. This article reports the first expert-consensus re- author)screenedtheabstractsconsideredfortopics.Prospectiveran-
                 view of evidence-based CS ERAS practices.                domized clinical trials, meta-analyses, and well-designed,
                                                                          nonrandomized studies were given preference. When multiple pub-
                                                                          lications had sample overlap, the most recent report was selected.
                 Methods                                                  Controversies were discussed and resolved via in-person meetings,
                                                                          conference calls, and discussions. A minimum of 75% agreement on
                 We followed the 2011 Institute of Medicine Standards for Develop- class and level was required for consensus.10 Consistent with the In-
                 ing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, using a standardized al- stitute of Medicine guidelines, panel members with relevant con-
                 gorithm that included experts, key questions, subject champions, flicts of interest (COI) were identified and recused from voting on as-
                 systematic literature reviews, selection and appraisal of evidence sociated recommendations. The structure of the recommendations
                 quality, and development of clear consensus recommendations.8 was modeled after prior published ERAS guidelines.11 We used the So-
                 We minimized repetition of existing guidelines and consensus ciety of Thoracic Surgeons/American Association for Thoracic Sur-
                 statements and focused on specific information in the framework gery2017updateddocument“ClassificationofRecommendationsand
                 of ERAS protocols.                                       Level of Evidence,” and American College of Cardiology/American

                 jamasurgery.com                                                 (Reprinted) JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 755

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                           Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery


                 Figure. PRISMA Flow Diagram
                                                                             Box. Class of Recommendation and Levels of Evidencea

                   3870 Records identified through 182 Additional records identified
                       database searching          through other sources     Class (Strength) of Recommendation
                                                                             I (strong): benefit many times greater than risk
                                                                             IIa (moderate): benefit much greater than risk
                                  4052 Records after duplicates
                                      removed                                IIb (weak): benefit greater than risk
                                                                             III: no benefit (moderate): benefit equal to risk
                                    4052
                                        Records screened                     III: harm (strong): risk greater than benefit

                                                3089 Records excluded on the Level (Quality) of Evidence
                                                    basis of titles and abstracts A
                                                                              High-quality evidence from more than 1 randomized clinical trial
                                   963 Full-text articles                     Meta-analysis of high-quality randomized clinical trials
                                       assessed for eligibility
                                                                              One or more randomized clinical trials corroborated by registry
                                                                              studies
                                                664 Full-text articles excluded
                                                    based on study design or B-R
                                                    gaps on reporting
                                                 28 Had an ineligible population Moderate-quality evidence from 1 or more randomized clinical
                                                 19 Overlapped studies        trial
                                                 41 Were case series studies
                                                                              Meta-analysis of moderate-quality randomized clinical trials
                                                 14 Were commentaries
                                                                             B-NR
                                    197 Studies included in                   Moderate-quality evidence from 1 or more well-designed,
                                       qualitative synthesis                  well-executed nonrandomized studies or observational studies
                                                                             C-LD
                                   197 Studies included in                    Randomized or nonrandomized observational or registry studies
                                       quantitative synthesis
                                       (meta-analysis)                        with limitations of design or execution
                                                                             C-EO
                                                                              Consensus of expert opinion based on clinical experience

                                                                             a Adapted from Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Halperin JL. The evolution and
                                                                             future of ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines: a 30-year journey: a report
                 Heart Association clinical practice guidelines to grade the consensus of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
                                                                    10,12
                 class(strength)ofrecommendationandlevel(quality)ofevidence. Force 1099 on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1373-84.13
                 (Box; eAppendix in the Supplement).                         (Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.)

                                                                          quality evidence, we recommend preoperative measurement of he-
                                                                          moglobin A to assist with risk stratification (class IIa, level C-LD).
                 Results                                                           1c

                 Resulting consensus statements are summarized in Table 1.They Preoperative Measurement of Albumin for Risk Stratification
                 are organized into preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative Low preoperative serum albumin in patients undergoing CS is as-
                 strategies.                                              sociated with an increased risk of morbidity and mortality postop-
                                                                          eratively (independent of body mass index).18 Hypoalbuminemia is
                 Preoperative Strategies                                  a prognosticator of preoperative risk, correlating with increased

                 Preoperative Measurement of Hemoglobin A1c for Risk Stratification length of time on a ventilator, acute kidney injury (AKI), infection,
                                                                                                      19-21
                 Optimal preoperative glycemic control, defined by a hemoglobin A1c longer length of stay, and mortality. Low-quality meta-analyses
                 level less than 6.5%, has been associated with significant de- support measuring preoperative albumin to prognosticate postop-
                 creases in deep sternal wound infection, ischemic events, and other erative CS complications.21 Based on the moderate quality of evi-
                 complications.13,14 Evidence-based guidelines based on poor- dence, it can be useful to assess preoperative albumin before CS
                 quality meta-analyses recommend screening all patients for diabe- to assist with risk stratification (class IIa, level C-LD).
                 tes preoperatively and intervening to improve glycemic control to

                 achieve a hemoglobin A1c level less than 7% in patients for whom Preoperative Correction of Nutritional Deficiency
                 this is relevant.15 Despite this recommendation, approximately 25% For patients who are malnourished, oral nutritional supplementa-

                 of patients undergoing CS have hemoglobin A1c levels greater than tion has the greatest effect if started 7 to 10 days preoperatively and
                 7%, and 10% have undiagnosed diabetes, indicating a failure to ap- has been associated with a reduction in the prevalence of infec-
                 ply current evidence-based recommendations for preoperative dia- tious complications in colorectal patients.22 In patients undergoing
                 betes management.16 A recent retrospective review demon- CS who had a serum albumin level less than 3.0 g/dL (to convert to
                 strated that preadmission glycemic control, as assessed by g/L, multiply by 10.0), supplementation with 7 to 10 days’ worth of
                                                                      17                                            23-26
                 hemoglobin A1c, is associated with decreased long-term survival. intensive nutrition therapy may improve outcomes. Currently,
                 It is unclear whether preoperative interventions in patients under- however, no adequately powered trials of nutritional therapy initi-
                 going CS will result in improved outcomes. Based on this moderate- ated early in patients undergoing CS who are considered high risk

          756    JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 (Reprinted)                                          jamasurgery.com

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery                      Special Communication Clinical Review & Education

                 are available.27 In addition, this may not be feasible in urgent or emer-
                                                                          Table 1. Classification of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
                 gency settings. Further studies are needed to determine when to
                                                                          LOE by
                 delay surgery to correct nutritional deficits. Based on these data, we COR Recommendation
                 note that correction of nutritional deficiency is recommended when I
                 feasible (class IIa, level C-LD).                          A    Tranexamic acid or epsilon aminocaproic acid during on-pump
                                                                                 cardiac surgical procedures
                 Consumption of Clear Liquids Before General Anesthesia     B-R  Perioperative glycemic control
                 Most CS programs mandate that a patient ingest nothing by mouth B-R A care bundle of evidence-based best practices to reduce surgical
                 after midnight for surgery the following day,or at the very least, fast site infections
                 for 6 to 8 hours from the intake of a solid meal before elective car- B-R Goal-directed fluid therapy
                 diac surgery.28 Several randomized clinical trials have demon- B-NR A perioperative, multimodal, opioid-sparing, pain management plan
                 strated, however, that nonalcoholic clear fluids can be safely given B-NR Avoidance of persistent hypothermia (<36.0°C) after
                                                                                 cardiopulmonary bypass in the early postoperative period.
                 up to 2 hours before the induction of anesthesia, and a light meal
                                                                            B-NR Maintenance of chest tube patency to prevent retained blood
                 can be given up to 6 hours before elective procedures requiring gen-
                                                                            B-NR Postoperative systematic delirium screening tool use at least once
                             28-30
                 eral anesthesia. Encouraging clear liquids until 2 to 4 hours pre- per nursing shift
                 operatively is an important component of all ERAS protocols out- C-LD Stopping smoking and hazardous alcohol consumption 4 weeks
                 side of CS.31 However, no large studies have been performed in  before elective surgery
                 populations undergoing CS. The supporting evidence is extrapo- IIa
                 lated from populations having noncardiac surgery. A small study in B-R Early detection of kidney stress and interventions to avoid acute
                                                                                 kidney injury after surgery
                 patients undergoing CS demonstrated that an oral carbohydrate
                                                                            B-R  Use of rigid sternal fixation to potentially improve or accelerate
                 drink consumed 2 hours preoperatively was safe, and no incidents sternal healing and reduce mediastinal wound complications
                 of aspiration occurred.32 Aspiration pneumonitis has not been re- B-NR Prehabilitation for patients undergoing elective surgery with
                 ported, although this potential remains in patients undergoing CS multiple comorbidities or significant deconditioning
                                                                            B-NR An insulin infusion to treat hyperglycemia in all patients
                 who have delayed gastric emptying owing to diabetes mellitus, and postoperatively
                 transesophageal echocardiography may also increase aspiration risk. B-NR Strategies to ensure extubation within6hofsurgery
                 Based on the data available on CS, clear liquids may be continued C-LD Patient engagement tools, including online/application-based
                 up to 2 to 4 hours before general anesthesia (class IIb, level C-LD). systems to promote education, compliance, and patient-reported
                                                                                 outcomes
                                                                            C-LD Chemical or mechanical thromboprophylaxis after surgery
                 Preoperative Carbohydrate Loading
                                                                            C-LD Preoperative measurement of hemoglobin A1c to assist with risk
                 A carbohydrate drink (a 12-ounce clear beverage or a 24-g complex stratification
                 carbohydrate beverage) 2 hours preoperatively reduces insulin re- C-LD Preoperative correction of nutritional deficiency when feasible
                 sistance and tissue glycosylation, improves postoperative glucose IIb
                 control, and enhances return of gut function.31 In a 2003 Cochrane
                                                                            C-LD Continued consumption of clear liquids up until 2 to 4 h before
                 review30 of patients undergoing CS, carbohydrate loading reduced general anesthesia
                 postoperative insulin resistance and hospital length of stay.In a large C-LD Preoperative oral carbohydrate loading may be considered before
                 randomized clinical trial29,30 in patients undergoing CS, preopera- surgery
                                                                          III (No
                 tive carbohydrate administration was found to be safe and im- Benefit)
                 proved cardiac function immediately after cardiopulmonary by- A Stripping or breaking the sterile field of chest tubes to remove clots.
                                                                   33,34
                 pass. However, it did not affect postoperative insulin resistance. III
                 Given the current minimal supportive data in patients undergoing (Harm)
                 CS, carbohydrate loading is given a weak recommendation at this B-R Hyperthermia (>37.9°C) while rewarming on cardiopulmonary
                                                                                 bypass.
                 time (class IIb, level C-LD).
                                                                          Abbreviations: A, A-level evidence; B-R, B-level evidence, randomized studies;
                                                                          B-NR, B-level evidence, nonrandomized studies; C-LD, C-level evidence, limited
                 Patient Engagement Tools
                                                                          data; COR, classification of recommendation; LOE, level of evidence.
                 Patient education and counseling prior to surgery can be com-
                 pleted in person, through printed material, or through novel online
                 or application-based approaches. These efforts include explana- Prehabilitation
                 tions of procedures and goals that may help reduce perioperative Prehabilitation enables patients to withstand the stress of surgery
                 fear, fatigue, and discomfort and enhance recovery and early dis- by augmenting functional capacity.38-40 Preoperative exercise de-
                 charge. Data are emerging that software applications can engage pa- creases sympathetic overreactivity,improves insulin sensitivity,and
                 tients, promote compliance, and capture patient-reported out- increases the ratio of lean body mass to body fat.41-43 It also im-
                 come measures.35 They are designed to increase preventive care and proves physical and psychological readiness for surgery, reduces
                 encourage patients to perform physical exercise. These platforms postoperative complications and the length of stay, and improves
                 have the potential to increase patient knowledge, decrease anxi- the transition from the hospital to the community.38,39 A cardiac pre-
                 ety, improve health outcomes, and reduce variation in care.36,37 Pi- habilitation program should include education, nutritional optimi-
                 lot studies in CS have demonstrated the effectiveness of e-health zation, exercise training, social support, and anxiety reduction, al-
                 platforms without any evidence of harm. Thus, it is recommended though current existing evidence is limited.41-44 Three non-CS
                 that these efforts be undertaken37 (class IIa, level C-LD). studies45-47 have successfully demonstrated the benefits of 3 to 4

                 jamasurgery.com                                                 (Reprinted) JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 757

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                           Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery


                 Table 2. Surgical Site Infection Bundle, Including Classification Level IA data exists suggesting that weight-based cephalosporins
                 of Recommendation and Level of Evidence                  should be administered fewer than 60 minutes before the skin inci-
                                                                          sion and continued for 48 hours after completion of CS. When the
                 LOE by
                                                                                                                            64,65
                 COR       Recommendation                                 surgery is more than 4 hours, antibiotics require redosing.
                 I                                                        Clarity on the preferability of continuous vs intermittent dosing of
                                                                                                   66
                   A       Perform topical intranasal decolonization prior to surgery cefazolin requires further data. A meta-analysis of skin prepara-
                   A       Administer intravenous cephalosporin prophylactic antibiotic tion and depilation protocols indicates that clipping is preferred to
                           30-60 min prior to surgery                     shaving.67 Clipping using electric clippers should occur close to the
                   C       Clipping (as opposed to shaving) immediately prior to surgery time of surgery.68 A preoperative shower with chlorhexidine has
                 IIb                                                      only been demonstrated to reduce bacterial counts in the wound
                   C       Use a chlorhexidine-alcohol–based solution for skin preparation and is not associated with significant levels of efficacy.57 Postopera-
                           before surgery
                                                                          tive measures including sterile dressing removal within 48 hours
                 IIa
                                                                          and daily incision washing with chlorhexidine are potentially
                   C       Remove operative wound dressing after 48 h
                                                                          beneficial.69,70
                 Abbreviations: COR, classification of recommendation; LOE, level of evidence. In summary, we recommend the implementation of a care
                                                                          bundle to include topical intranasal therapies to eradicate staphy-
                 weeks of prehabilitation in the context of ERAS. Prehabilitation in- lococcal colonization, weight-based cephalosporin infusion fewer
                 terventions prior to CS must be further examined to advance this than 60 minutes before skin incision, with redosing for cases lon-
                 area of research. The small number of studies and the diversity of ger than 4 hours, skin preparation, and depilation protocols with
                 validation tools used limits the strength of the recommendation. In dressing changes every 48 hours to reduce surgical site infections
                 addition, this may not be feasible in urgent and emergency set- (class I, level B-R). The bundle of recommendations to reduce sur-
                 tings (class IIa, level B-NR).                           gical site infections is summarized in Table 2 with the classification
                                                                          of recommendations and level of evidence per Lazar et al.57
                 Smoking and Hazardous Alcohol Consumption
                 Screening for hazardous alcohol use and cigarette smoking should Hyperthermia
                 be performed preoperatively.48 Tobaccosmoking and hazardous al- Moderate-quality prospective studies have demonstrated that
                 cohol consumption are risk factors for postoperative complica- when rewarming on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), hyperther-
                 tions and present another opportunity for preoperative interven- mia (core temperature >37.9°C) is associated with cognitive defi-
                 tions. They are associated with respiratory, wound, bleeding, cits, infection, and renal dysfunction.71-73 Any postoperative
                 metabolic, and infectious complications.23,49-51 Smoking cessation hyperthermia within 24 hours after coronary artery bypass graft-
                 and alcohol abstinence for 1 month are associated with improved ing has been associated with cognitive dysfunction at 4 to 6
                 postoperative outcomes after surgery.51-53 Only a small number of weeks.71 Rewarming on CPB to normothermia should be com-
                 studies are available, and further CS-specific studies are needed. bined with continuous surface warming.74 Thus, we recommend
                 However, given the low risk of this intervention, patients should be avoiding hyperthermia while rewarming on cardiopulmonary
                 questioned regarding smoking and hazardous alcohol consump- bypass (class III, level B-R).
                 tion using validated screening tools, and consumption should be
                 stopped 4 weeks before elective surgery.54 However, this may not Rigid Sternal Fixation
                 be feasible in urgent or emergency settings (class I, level C-LD). Most cardiac surgeons use wire cerclage for sternotomy closure be-
                                                                          cause of the perceived low rate of sternal wound complications and
                 Intraoperative Strategies                                low cost of wires. Wire cerclage brings the cut edges of bone back
                 Surgical Site Infection Reduction                        together by wrapping a wire or band around or through the 2 por-
                 To help reduce surgical site infections, CS programs should include tions of bone, then tightening the wire or band to pull the 2 parts
                 a care bundle that includes topical intranasal therapies, depilation together. This achieves approximation and compression but does
                 protocols, and appropriate timing and stewardship of periopera- not eliminate side-by-side movement, and thus rigid fixation is not
                 tive prophylactic antibiotics, combined with smoking cessation, ad- achieved with wire cerclage.75
                 equate glycemic control, and promotion of postoperative normo- In 2 multicenter randomized clinical trials, sternotomy closure
                 thermia during recovery. Moderate-quality meta-analysis have with rigid plate fixation resulted in significantly better sternal heal-
                 concluded that care bundles of 3 to 5 evidence-based interven- ing, fewer sternal complications, and no additional cost compared
                 tions can reduce surgical site infections.55,56 This topic has been re- with wire cerclage at 6 months after surgery.75,76 Patient-reported
                 viewed extensively with class of recommendation and level of evi- outcome measures demonstrated significantly less pain, better
                 dence in an expert consensus review by Lazar et al.57    upper-extremity function, and improved quality-of-life scores,
                    Evidence supports topical intranasal therapies to eradicate with no difference in total 90-day cost.76 Limitations of these
                 staphylococcal colonization in patients undergoing CS.57,58 From studies include a sample size designed to test the primary end
                 18% to 30% of all patients undergoing surgery are carriers of point of improved sternal healing but not the secondary end
                 Staphylococcus aureus, and they have 3 times the risk of S. aureus points of pain and function; in addition, the studies were limited
                 surgical site infections and bacteremia.59 It is recommended that by unblinded radiologists. Additional research77-79 demonstrated
                 topical therapy be applied universally.60-62 Two studies validate the decreased mediastinitis, painful sternal nonunion relief after
                 reduction of such infections in patients receiving mupirocin.58,63 median sternotomy, and superior bony healing when compared

          758    JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 (Reprinted)                                          jamasurgery.com

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery                      Special Communication Clinical Review & Education


                 with wire cerclage. Based on these studies, the consensus con- Pain Management
                 cluded that rigid sternal fixation has benefits in patients undergo- Until recently, parenteral opioids were the mainstay of postopera-
                 ing sternotomy and should be especially considered in individuals tive pain management after CS. Opioids are associated with mul-
                 at high risk, such as those with a high body mass index, previous tiple adverse effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, nau-
                 chest wall radiation, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disor- sea,vomiting,andileus.99 Thereisgrowingevidencethatmultimodal
                 der, or steroid use. Rigid sternal fixation can be useful to improve opioid-sparing approaches can adequately address pain through the
                 or accelerate sternal healing and reduce mediastinal wound com- additive or synergistic effects of different types of analgesics, per-
                 plications (class IIa, level B-R).                       mitting lower opioid doses in the population receiving CS.100
                                                                             Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are associated with re-
                 Tranexamic Acid or Epsilon Aminocaproic Acid             nal dysfunction after CS.101 Selective COX-2 inhibition is associated
                 Bleeding is a common occurrence after CS and can adversely affect with a significant risk of thromboembolic events after CS.102 The saf-
                 outcomes.80,81 Publications on patient blood management are typi- est nonopioid analgesic may be acetaminophen.103 Intravenous ac-
                 cally focused on reducing red blood cell transfusions through iden- etaminophen may be better absorbed until gut function has recov-
                 tification and treatment of preoperative anemia, delineation of safe ered postoperatively.104 Per a medium-quality meta-analysis, when
                 transfusion thresholds, intraoperative blood scavenging, monitor- added to opioids, acetaminophen produces superior analgesia, an
                 ing of the coagulation system, and data-driven algorithms for ap- opioid-sparing effect, and independent antiemetic actions.105 Ac-
                 propriate transfusion practices. This has been an area of focus in pre- etaminophen dosing is1gevery8hours. Combination acetamino-
                 viously published, large, comprehensive, multidisciplinary, phen preparations with opioids should be discontinued.
                 multisociety clinical practice guidelines.82,83 The inclusion of all as- Tramadol has dual opioid and nonopioid effects but with a high
                 pects of patient blood management are beyond the scope of these deliriumrisk.106 Tramadolproducesa25%decreaseinmorphinecon-
                 recommendations, although we encourage the incorporation of sumption, decreased pain scores, and improved patient comfort
                 these existing guidelines within a local ERAS framework. This in- postoperatively.107 Pregabalin also decreases opioid consumption
                 cludes education, audit, and continuous practitioner feedback. Ow- and is used in postoperative multimodal analgesia.108 Pregabalin
                 ing to the near-universal accessibility, low-risk profile, cost- given 1 hour before surgery and for 2 postoperative days improves
                 effectiveness, and ease of implementation, we did evaluate pain scores compared with placebo.109 A 600-mg gabapentin dose,
                 antifibrinolyticusewithtranexamicacidorepsilonaminocaproicacid. 2 hours before CS, lowers pain scores, opioid requirements, and post-
                 In a large randomized clinical trial of patients undergoing coronary operative nausea and vomiting.110
                 revascularization, total blood products transfused, and major hem- Dexmedetomidine, an intravenous α-2 agonist, reduces opi-
                 orrhage or tamponade requiring reoperation were reduced using oid requirements.111 A medium-quality meta-analysis of dexmedeto-
                 tranexamic acid.84 Higher dosages, however, appear to be associ- midine infusion reduced all-cause mortality at 30 days with a lower
                 ated with seizures.85,86 A maximum total dose of 100 mg/kg is incidence of postoperative delirium and shorter intubation
                 recommended.87 Based on this evidence, tranexamic acid or epsi- times.112,113 Dexmedetomidine may reduce AKI after CS.114 Ket-
                 lon aminocaproic acid is recommended during on-pump cardiac sur- amine has potential uses in CS owing to its favorable hemodynamic
                 gical procedures (class I, level A).                     profile, minimal respiratory depression, analgesic properties, and re-
                                                                          duced delirium incidence; further studies are needed in the CS
                 Postoperative Strategies                                 setting.115
                 Perioperative Glycemic Control                              Patients should receive preoperative counseling to establish ap-
                 Interventions to improve glycemic control are known to improve out- propriate expectations of perioperative analgesia targets. Pain as-
                 comes. Multiple randomized clinical trials88-91 with diverse patient sessments must be made in the intubated patient to ensure the low-
                 cohorts support intensive perioperative glucose control. Preopera- est effective opioid dose. The Critical Care Pain Observation Tool,
                 tive carbohydrate loading has resulted in reduced glucose levels af- Behavioral Pain Scale, and Bispectral Index monitoring may have a
                 ter abdominal surgery and CS.92,93 Epidural analgesia during CS has role in this setting.116-119 Although no single pathway exists for mul-
                 been shown to reduce hyperglycemia incidence.94 After CS, hyper- timodal opioid-sparing pain management, there is sufficient evi-
                 glycemia morbidity is multifactorial and attributed to glucose tox- dence to recommend that CS programs use acetaminophen, Tra-
                 icity, increased oxidative stress, prothrombotic effects, and madol, dexmedetomidine, and pregabalin (or gabapentin) based on
                 inflammation.14,15,89,91,95 Perioperative glycemic control is recom- formulary availability (class I, level B-NR).
                 mended based on randomized data96 not specific to populations un-
                 dergoing CS and high-quality observational studies (class I, level B-R). Postoperative Systematic Delirium Screening
                                                                          Delirium is an acute confusional state characterized by fluctuating
                 Insulin Infusion                                         mental status, inattention, and either disorganized thinking or al-
                 Treatment of hyperglycemia (glucose >160-180 mg/dL [to convert to tered level of consciousness that occurs in approximately 50% of
                 mmol/L, multiply by 0.0555]) with an insulin infusion for the patient patients after CS.120-125 Delirium is associated with reduced in-
                 undergoing CS may be associated with improved perioperative gly- hospital and long-term survival, freedom from hospital readmis-
                 cemic control. Postoperative hypoglycemia should be avoided, es- sion, and cognitive and functional recovery.126 Early delirium detec-
                 pecially in patients with a tight blood glucose target range (ie, 80-110 tion is essential to determine the underlying cause (ie, pain,
                 mg/dL).95,97,98 Randomized clinical trials support insulin infusion pro- hypoxemia, low cardiac output, and sepsis) and initiate appropri-
                 tocols to treat hyperglycemia perioperatively; however, more high- ate treatment.127 A systematic delirium screening tool such as the
                 quality, CS-specific studies are needed (class IIa, level B-NR). Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit or the In-

                 jamasurgery.com                                                 (Reprinted) JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 759

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                           Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery

                 tensive Care Unit Delirium Screening Checklist should be used.128,129 While there are no standard criteria for the timing of mediasti-
                 The perioperative team should consider routine delirium monitor- nal drain removal, evidence suggests that they can be safely re-
                 ing at least once per nursing shift.121                  moved as soon as the drainage becomes macroscopically serous.154
                    Owing to the complexity of delirium pathogenesis, it is un- Based on these clinical trials, maintenance of chest tube patency
                 likely that a single intervention or pharmacologic agent will reduce without breaking the sterile field is recommended to prevent re-
                 the incidence of delirium after CS.127 Nonpharmacologic strategies tained blood complications (class I, level B-NR). Stripping or break-
                 are a first-line component of management.130,131 There is no evi- ing the sterile field of chest tubes to remove clot is not recom-
                 dence that prophylactic antipsychotic use (eg, haloperidol) re- mended (class IIIA, level B-R).
                 duces delirium.132,133 Based on moderate-quality, nonrandomized
                 studies in patients receiving noncardiac surgery, delirium screen- Chemical Thromboprophylaxis
                 ing is recommended at least once per nursing shift to identify pa- Vascular thrombotic events include both deep venous thrombosis
                 tients at risk and facilitate implementation of prevention and treat- and pulmonary embolism and represent potentially preventable
                 ment protocols (class I, level B-NR).                    complications after CS. Patients remain hypercoagulable after CS,
                                                                          increasing vascular thrombotic event risk.155,156 All patients benefit
                 Persistent Hypothermia                                   from mechanical thromboprophylaxis achieved with compression
                 Postoperative hypothermia is the failure to return to or maintain nor- stockings and/or intermittent pneumatic compression during hos-
                 mothermia (>36°C) 2 to 5 hours after an intensive care unit (ICU) ad- pitalization or until they are adequately mobile to reduce the inci-
                 mission associated with CS.134 Hypothermia is associated with in- dence of deep-vein thrombosis after surgery even in the absence
                 creased bleeding, infection, a prolonged hospital stay, and death. of pharmacological treatment.157-159 Prophylactic anticoagulation for
                 Largeregistryobservationalstudiessuggestifhypothermiaisofshort vascular thrombotic events should be considered on the first post-
                 duration, outcomes can be improved.135,136 Based on this evi- operativedayanddailythereafter.160 Arecentmedium-qualitymeta-
                 dence, we recommend prevention of hypothermia by using forced- analysis suggested that chemical prophylaxis could reduce vascu-
                 air warming blankets, raising the ambient room temperature, and lar thrombotic event risk without increasing bleeding or cardiac
                 warming irrigation and intravenous fluids to avoid hypothermia in tamponade.161 Based on this evidence, pharmacological prophy-
                 the early postoperative period71,137-139 (class 1, level B-NR). laxis should be used as soon as satisfactory hemostasis has been
                                                                          achieved (most commonly on postoperative day 1 through
                 Chest Tube Patency                                       discharge)160-162 (class IIa, level C-LD).
                 Immediately after CS, most patients have some degree of bleeding.81
                 If left unevacuated, retained blood can cause tamponade or hemo- Extubation Strategies
                 thorax. Thus, a pericardial drain is always necessary after CS to evacu- Prolonged mechanical ventilation after CS is associated with lon-
                 ate shed mediastinal blood.80 Drains used to evacuate shed medi- ger hospitalization, higher morbidity, mortality, and increased
                 astinal blood are prone to clogging with clotted blood in up to 36% costs.163 Prolonged intubation is associated with both ventilator-
                 of patients.140,141 When these tubes clog, shed mediastinal blood can associated pneumonia and significant dysphagia.164 Early extuba-
                 pool around the heart or lungs, necessitating reinterventions for tam- tion, within 6 hours of ICU arrival, can be achieved with time-
                 ponade or hemothorax.142-144 Retained shed mediastinal blood he- directed extubation protocols and low-dose opioid anesthesia. This
                 molyzes and promotes an oxidative inflammatory process that may is safe (even in patients at high risk) and associated with decreased
                 further cause pleural and pericardial effusions and trigger postop- ICU time, length of stay, and costs.165-172 A meta-analysis demon-
                 erative atrial fibrillation.143,145                      strated that ICU times and length of stay were reduced; however,
                    Chest tube manipulation strategies that are commonly used in no difference in morbidity and mortality occurred, likely because of
                 an attempt to maintain tube patency after CS are of questionable disparate study design and statistical underpowering.173 Thus, stud-
                 efficacy and safety. One example is chest-tube stripping or milking, ies have shown early extubation to be safe, but efficacy in reducing
                 in which the practitioner strips the tubes toward the drainage can- complications has not been conclusively demonstrated. Based on
                 ister to break up visible clots or create short periods of high nega- this evidence, we recommend strategies to ensure extubation within
                 tive pressure to remove clots. In meta-analyses of randomized clini- 6 hours of surgery (class IIa, level B-NR).
                 cal trials, chest-tube stripping has been shown to be ineffective and
                 potentially harmful.146,147 Another technique used to maintain pat- Kidney Stress and Acute Kidney Injury
                 ency is to break the sterile field to access the inside of chest tubes Acute kidney injury (AKI) complicates 22% to 36% of cardiac sur-
                 and use a smaller tube to suction the clot out. This technique may gical procedures, doubling total hospital costs.174-176 Strategies to
                 be dangerous, because it can increase infection risk and potentially reduce AKI involve assessing which patients are at risk and then
                 damage internal structures.148                           implementing therapies to reduce the incidence. Urinary biomark-
                    To address the unmet need to prevent chest-tube clogging, ac- ers (such as tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 and insulin-
                 tive chest-tube clearance methods can be used to prevent occlu- like growth factor-binding protein 7) can identify patients as early
                 sion without breaking the sterile field. This has been demonstrated as 1 hour after CPB who are at increased risk of developing AKI.177,178
                 to reduce the subsequent need for interventions to treat retained In a randomized clinical trial after CS, patients with positive uri-
                 blood compared with conventional chest tube drainage in 5 non- nary biomarkers who were assigned to an intervention algorithm had
                 randomized clinical trials of CS.149-153 Active chest-tube clearance has reductions in subsequent AKI.179,180 The algorithm included avoid-
                 also been shown to reduce postoperative atrial fibrillation, suggest- ing nephrotoxic agents, discontinuing angiotensin-converting en-
                 ing that retained blood may be a trigger for this common problem.145 zyme inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists for 48 hours, close

          760    JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 (Reprinted)                                          jamasurgery.com

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery                      Special Communication Clinical Review & Education

                 monitoring of creatinine and urine output, avoiding hyperglycemia mia, including acute or chronic blood loss, vitamin B12, or folate
                 and radiocontrast agents, and close monitoring to optimize vol- deficiency, and anemia of chronic disease.190 If time permits, all
                 ume status and hemodynamic parameters. Similar results have been causes of anemia should be investigated, but data supporting im-
                 reported in a randomized clinical trial after surgery in a population proved outcomes in the literature on CS is weak. Intraoperative an-
                 who received noncardiac surgery.181                      esthetic and perfusion considerations are also important ERAS ele-
                    Although many risk scores for AKI after CS have been pub- ments. Impaired renal oxygenation has been demonstrated during
                 lished, these scoring systems have good discrimination in assess- CPB and is ameliorated by an increase in CPB flow.191 This may con-
                 ing low-risk groups but relatively poor discrimination in patients at tribute to postoperative renal dysfunction and suggests that goal-
                 moderate to high risk.182 This would suggest that all patients un- directed perfusion strategies need to be considered. Other anes-
                 dergoing CS may benefit from detection of modifiable early kidney thetic considerations may include a comprehensive protective lung
                 stress to prevent AKI. Based on these studies, biomarkers are rec- ventilation strategy. Multiple studies have established that clini-
                 ommended for early identification of patients at risk and to guide cians should use a low tidal volume strategy for mechanical venti-
                 an intervention strategy to reduce AKI (class IIa, level B-R). lation in CS.192 Early postoperative enteral feeding and mobiliza-
                                                                          tion after surgery are other essential components of ERAS surgical
                 Goal-Directed Fluid Therapy                              protocols.1 We recommend that programs tailor these recommen-
                 Goal-directed fluid therapy uses monitoring techniques to guide dations to achieve these goals working with staff with expertise in
                 clinicians with administering fluids, vasopressors, and inotropes to nutrition, early cardiac rehabilitation, and physical therapy.
                 avoid hypotension and low cardiac output.183 While many clini-
                 cians do this informally, goal-directed fluid therapy uses a stan-
                 dardized algorithm for all patients to improve outcomes. Quanti- Conclusions
                 fied goals include blood pressure, cardiac index, systemic venous
                 oxygen saturation, and urine output. Additionally, oxygen con- In CS, a fast-track project to improve outcomes was first initiated by
                 sumption, oxygen debt, and lactate levels may augment therapeu- bundling perioperative treatments.193 The ERAS pathway was ini-
                 tic tactics. Goal-directed fluid therapy trials consistently demon- tiated in the 1990s by a group of academic surgeons to improve peri-
                 strate reduced complication rates and length of stay in surgery operative care for patients receiving colorectal care, but it is now
                 overall and specifically in CS.184-188 Based on this, we recommend practiced in most fields of surgery.1,194 Although ERAS is relatively
                 goal-directed fluid therapy to reduce postoperative complications new to CS, we anticipate that programs can benefit from these rec-
                 (class I, level B-R).                                    ommendations as they develop protocols to decrease unneces-
                                                                          sary variation and improve quality, safety, and value for their pa-
                                                                          tients. Cardiac surgery involves a large clinician group working in
                 Other Important, Ungraded ERAS Elements                  concert throughout all phases of care. Patient and caregiver educa-
                                                                          tion and systemwide engagement (facilitated by specialty champi-
                 Preoperative anemia is common and associated with poor out- ons and nurse coordinators) are necessary to implement best prac-
                 comes in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery.189 Patients sched- tices. A successful introduction of ERAS protocols is possible, but a
                 uled for CS may have multifactorial causative mechanisms for ane- broad-based, multidisciplinary approach is imperative for success.

                 ARTICLE INFORMATION                   Center, Bend, Oregon (Boyle); Now with Administrative, technical, or material support: D.
                 Accepted for Publication: March 16, 2019. Department of Surgery, Max Rady College of Engelman, Williams, Perrault, Reddy, Levy, Lobdell,
                                                       Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, R. Engelman, Boyle.
                 Published Online: May4,2019.          Canada (Arora); Department of Surgery, Baystate Supervision: D. Engelman, Perrault, Reddy, Fletcher,
                 doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2019.1153        Medical Center, Springfield, Massachusetts Nelson.
                 Author Affiliations: Heart and Vascular Program, (R. M. Engelman).          Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Khoynezhad
                 Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, Author Contributions: Dr Engelman had full access consults for and receives speaking honoraria from
                 Massachusetts (D. T. Engelman); Montreal Heart to all the data in the study and takes responsibility Atricure Inc. Dr Levy reported serving on research
                 Institute, Montreal, Canada (Ben Ali, Perrault); for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the and steering committees for Boehringer-Ingelheim,
                 WakeMed Health and Hospitals, Raleigh, North data analysis.                 CSL Behring, Octapharma, Instrumentation Labs,
                 Carolina (Williams); Centennial Heart & Vascular Concept and design: D. Engelman, Williams, and Merck. Dr Perrault is on the scientific advisory
                 Center, Nashville, Tennessee (Reddy); St Boniface Perrault, Reddy, Arora, Roselli, Gerdisch, Lobdell, board for ClearFlow Inc and a consultant and
                 Hospital, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Fletcher, Kirsch, Nelson, Gregory, Boyle. principal investigator for Somahlution. Dr Gerdisch
                 Manitoba, Canada (Arora); Cleveland Clinic, Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: is a consultant and principal investigator for and
                 Cleveland, Ohio (Roselli); MemorialCare Heart and D. Engelman, Ben Ali, Williams, Perrault, Reddy, receives speaker honoraria from Zimmer Biomet
                 Vascular Institute, Los Angeles, California Arora, Khoynezhad, Levy, Lobdell, Fletcher, Nelson, and Cryolife and consults for and receives speaking
                 (Khoynezhad); Franciscan Health Heart Center, R. Engelman.                  honoraria from Atricure Inc. Dr Arora has received
                 Indianapolis, Indiana (Gerdisch); Duke University Drafting of the manuscript: D. Engelman, Williams, honoraria from Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals and
                 School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina (Levy); Perrault, Arora, Khoynezhad, Gerdisch, Levy, an unrestricted education grant from Pfizer Canada.
                 Atrium Health, Department of Cardiovascular and Lobdell, Fletcher, R. Engelman, Boyle. Dr R. Engelman is a consultant for Cryolife.
                 Thoracic Surgery, North Carolina (Lobdell); Critical revision of the manuscript for important Dr D. Engelman reported personal fees from Astute
                 St Georges University of London, London, United intellectual content: D. Engelman, Ben Ali, Williams, Medical, Edwards Lifescience, and Zimmer-Biomet
                 Kingdom (Fletcher); Centre Hospitalier Perrault, Reddy, Arora, Roselli, Gerdisch, Levy, outside the submitted work. Dr Reddy reports
                 Universitaire Vaudois Cardiac Surgery Centre, Lobdell, Fletcher, Kirsch, Nelson, Gregory. personal fees from Astute Medical outside the
                 Lausanne, Switzerland (Kirsch); University of Statistical analysis: Ben Ali. submitted work. Dr Arora reports grants from Pfizer
                 Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (Nelson, Gregory);                        Canada and honoraria from Mallickrodt
                 Department of Cardiac Surgery, St Charles Medical                           Pharmaceuticals. Dr Roselli reports personal fees

                 jamasurgery.com                                                 (Reprinted) JAMA Surgery August 2019 Volume 154, Number 8 761

                                               © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                       Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                                                         Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery


                       from Abbott, Edwards, LivaNova, and Cryolife and     10. Bakaeen FG, Svensson LG, Mitchell JD,            23. Jie B, Jiang ZM, Nolan MT, Zhu SN, Yu K,
                       grants and personal fees from Gore, Medtronic,       Keshavjee S, Patterson GA, Weisel RD. The            Kondrup J. Impact of preoperative nutritional
                       and TerumoAortic, outside the submitted work.        American Association for Thoracic Surgery/Society    support on clinical outcome in abdominal surgical
                       Dr Boyle reports personal fees from ClearFlow        of Thoracic Surgeons position statement on           patients at nutritional risk. Nutrition. 2012;28(10):
                       Medical during the conduct of the study and is a     developing clinical practice documents. J Thorac     1022-1027. doi:10.1016/j.nut.2012.01.017
                       founder of and has a patent to ClearFlow Medical     Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153(4):999-1005. doi:10.       24. Lauck SB, Wood DA, Achtem L, et al. Risk
                       pending and issued. No other disclosures were        1016/j.jtcvs.2017.01.003                             stratification and clinical pathways to optimize
                       reported.                                            11. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, et al.        length of stay after transcatheter aortic valve
                                                                            Guidelines for perioperative care in elective        replacement. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30(12):1583-1587.
                       Disclaimer: The authors verify that all information
                                                                            colorectal surgery: Enhanced Recovery After          doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2014.07.012
                       and materials in this article are original, except for
                                                                            Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations: 2018.
                       the Box, which is reprinted with permission.                                                              25. McClave SA, Kozar R, Martindale RG, et al.
                                                                            World J Surg. 2019;43(3):659-695. doi:10.1007/       Summary points and consensus recommendations
                       Previous Presentation: American Association for      s00268-018-4844-y                                    from the North American Surgical Nutrition
                       Thoracic Surgery 98th Annual Meeting; April 28       12. Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, et al;      Summit.  JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013;37(5)
                       and May 1, 2018; San Diego, California.              ACC/AHA TASK FORCE MEMBERS. The evolution            (suppl):99S-105S. doi:10.1177/0148607113495892
                       Additional Contributions: We thank Olle              and future of ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines:  26. Yu PJ, Cassiere HA, Dellis SL, Manetta F,
                       Ljungqvist, MD, PhD, Örebro University, for his      a 30-year journey: a report of the American College  Kohn N, Hartman AR. Impact of preoperative
                       support throughout this process and Gudrun Kunst,    of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task        prealbumin on outcomes after cardiac surgery.
                       MD PhD, FRCA, FFICM, King’s College Hospital, and    Force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130  JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2015;39(7):870-874.
                       Michael Grant, MD, Johns Hopkins, for their review   (14):1208-1217. doi:10.1161/CIR.                     doi:10.1177/0148607114536735
                                                                            0000000000000090
                       of the manuscript. They were not compensated.                                                             27. Stoppe C, Goetzenich A, Whitman G, et al.
                                                                            13. Narayan P, Kshirsagar SN, Mandal CK, et al.      Role of nutrition support in adult cardiac surgery:
                       REFERENCES                                           Preoperative glycosylated hemoglobin: a risk factor  a consensus statement from an international
                                                                            for patients undergoing coronary artery bypass.
                       1. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced                                                             multidisciplinary expert group on nutrition in
                                                                            Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;104(2):606-612. doi:10.1016/
                       recovery after surgery: a review. JAMA Surg.2017;                                                         cardiac surgery. Crit Care. 2017;21(1):131. doi:10.
                                                                            j.athoracsur.2016.12.020
                       152(3):292-298. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2016.4952                                                            1186/s13054-017-1690-5
                                                                            14. Whang W, Bigger JT Jr; The CABG Patch Trial
                        . Eskicioglu C, Forbes SS, Aarts MA, Okrainec A,                                                         28. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and
                       2                                                    Investigators and Coordinators. Diabetes and
                       McLeod RS. Enhanced recovery after surgery                                                                the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk
                                                                            outcomes of coronary artery bypass graft surgery in
                       (ERAS) programs for patients having colorectal                                                            of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy
                                                                            patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction:
                       surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized trials.                                                            patients undergoing elective procedures: an
                                                                            results from the CABG Patch Trial database. JAm
                       J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13(12):2321-2329. doi:10.                                                       updated report by the American Society of
                                                                            Coll Cardiol. 2000;36(4):1166-1172. doi:10.1016/
                       1007/s11605-009-0927-2                                                                                    Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative
                                                                            S0735-1097(00)00823-8                                Fasting and the Use of Pharmacologic Agents to
                       3. Lassen K, Soop M, Nygren J, et al; Enhanced
                                                                            15. Wong J, Zoungas S, Wright C, Teede H.            Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration.
                       Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Group. Consensus
                                                                            Evidence-based guidelines for perioperative          Anesthesiology. 2017;126(3):376-393. doi:10.1097/
                       review of optimal perioperative care in colorectal
                                                                            management of diabetes in cardiac and vascular       ALN.0000000000001452
                       surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS)
                                                                            surgery. World J Surg. 2010;34(3):500-513. doi:10.
                       Group recommendations.   Arch Surg. 2009;144(10):                                                         29. Brady M, Kinn S, Ness V, O’Rourke K,
                                                                            1007/s00268-009-0380-0
                       961-969. doi:10.1001/archsurg.2009.170                                                                    Randhawa N, Stuart P. Preoperative fasting for
                                                                            16. Halkos ME, Puskas JD, Lattouf OM, et al.         preventing perioperative complications in
                        . Spanjersberg WR, Reurings J, Keus F,
                       4                                                    Elevated preoperative hemoglobin A1c level is        children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(4):
                       van Laarhoven CJ. Fast track surgery versus
                                                                            predictive of adverse events after coronary artery   CD005285.
                       conventional recovery strategies for colorectal
                                                                            bypass surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136
                       surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;(2):                                                            30. Brady M, Kinn S, Stuart P. Preoperative fasting
                                                                            (3):631-640. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.02.091
                       CD007635.                                                                                                 for adults to prevent perioperative complications.
                                                                            17. Robich MP, Iribarne A, Leavitt BJ, et al; Northern Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD004423.
                        . Stone AB, Grant MC, Pio Roda C, et al.
                       5                                                    New England Cardiovascular Disease Study Group.
                       Implementation costs of an enhanced recovery                                                              31. Ljungqvist O. Modulating postoperative insulin
                                                                            Intensity of glycemic control affects long-term
                       after surgery program in the united states:                                                               resistance by preoperative carbohydrate loading.
                                                                            survival after coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
                       a financial model and sensitivity analysis based on                                                       Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2009;23(4):401-
                                                                            Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;107(2):477-484. doi:10.
                       experiences at a quaternary academic medical                                                              409. doi:10.1016/j.bpa.2009.08.004
                                                                            1016/j.athoracsur.2018.07.078
                       center. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(3):219-225. doi:10.                                                      32. Järvelä K, Maaranen P, Sisto T. Pre-operative
                       1016/j.jamcollsurg.2015.11.021                       18. Engelman DT, Adams DH, Byrne JG, et al.          oral carbohydrate treatment before coronary artery
                                                                            Impact of body mass index and albumin on
                        . Thiele RH, Rea KM, Turrentine FE, et al.                                                               bypass surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2008;52
                       6                                                    morbidity and mortality after cardiac surgery.
                       Standardization of care: impact of an enhanced                                                            (6):793-797. doi:10.1111/j.1399-6576.2008.01660.x
                                                                            J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;118(5):866-873.
                       recovery protocol on length of stay, complications,
                                                                            doi:10.1016/S0022-5223(99)70056-5                    33. Feguri GR, de Lima PRL, de Cerqueira Borges D,
                       and direct costs after colorectal surgery. JAmColl                                                        et al. Preoperative carbohydrate load and
                       Surg. 2015;220(4):430-443. doi:10.1016/j.            19. Kudsk KA, Tolley EA, DeWitt RC, et al.           intraoperatively infused omega-3 polyunsaturated
                       jamcollsurg.2014.12.042                              Preoperative albumin and surgical site identify      fatty acids positively impact nosocomial morbidity
                                                                            surgical risk for major postoperative complications.
                        . Fleming IO, Garratt C, Guha R, et al. Aggregation                                                      after coronary artery bypass grafting:
                       7                                                    JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2003;27(1):1-9. doi:10.
                       of marginal gains in cardiac surgery: feasibility of a                                                    a double-blind controlled randomized trial. Nutr J.
                                                                            1177/014860710302700101
                       perioperative care bundle for enhanced recovery in                                                        2017;16(1):24. doi:10.1186/s12937-017-0245-6
                       cardiac surgical patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 20. Lee EH, Kim WJ, Kim JY, et al. Effect of       34. Breuer JP, von Dossow V, von Heymann C, et al.
                       2016;30(3):665-670. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2016.01.017   exogenous albumin on the incidence of                Preoperative oral carbohydrate administration to
                                                                            postoperative acute kidney injury in patients
                        . Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman D,                                                                  ASA III-IV patients undergoing elective cardiac
                       8                                                    undergoing off-pump coronary artery bypass
                       Greenfield S, Steinberg E, eds. Institute of Medicine                                                     surgery. Anesth Analg. 2006;103(5):1099-1108.
                                                                            surgery with a preoperative albumin level of less
                       (US) Committee on Standards for Developing                                                                doi:10.1213/01.ane.0000237415.18715.1d
                                                                            than 4.0 g/dl. Anesthesiology. 2016;124(5):1001-1011.
                       Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines: Clinical
                                                                            doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001051                     35. Hibbard JH, Greene J. What the evidence
                       Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC.                                                         shows about patient activation: better health
                       US: National Academies Press; 2011.                  21. Karas PL, Goh SL, Dhital K. Is low serum albumin outcomes and care experiences; fewer data on
                                                                            associated with postoperative complications in
                        . Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG;                                                            costs. Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(2):207-214.
                       9                                                    patients undergoing cardiac surgery? Interact
                       PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for                                                               doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1061
                                                                            Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2015;21(6):777-786.
                       systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA                                                          36. Oshima Lee E, Emanuel EJ. Shared decision
                       statement. Int J Surg. 2010;8(5):336-341. doi:10.    22. Waitzberg DL, Saito H, Plank LD, et al.          making to improve care and reduce costs. N Engl J
                       1016/j.ijsu.2010.02.007                              Postsurgical infections are reduced with specialized Med. 2013;368(1):6-8. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1209500
                                                                            nutrition support. World J Surg. 2006;30(8):1592-
                                                                            1604. doi:10.1007/s00268-005-0657-x

              762      JAMA Surgery    August 2019   Volume 154, Number 8    (Reprinted)                                                                          jamasurgery.com

                                                                 © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                       Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery                                                    Special Communication   Clinical Review & Education


                       37. Cook DJ, Manning DM, Holland DE, et al.          51. Tønnesen H, Nielsen PR, Lauritzen JB,            2006;81(1):397-404. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.
                       Patient engagement and reported outcomes in          Møller AM. Smoking and alcohol intervention          06.034
                       surgical recovery: effectiveness of an e-health      before surgery: evidence for best practice. Br J     65. Engelman R, Shahian D, Shemin R, et al;
                       platform. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(4):648-655.       Anaesth. 2009;102(3):297-306. doi:10.1093/bja/       Workforce on Evidence-Based Medicine, Society
                       doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2013.05.003                aen401                                               of Thoracic Surgeons. The Society of Thoracic
                       38. Arthur HM, Daniels C, McKelvie R, Hirsh J,       52. Sørensen LT. Wound healing and infection in      Surgeons practice guideline series: antibiotic
                       Rush B. Effect of a preoperative intervention on     surgery: the pathophysiological impact of smoking,   prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, part II: antibiotic
                       preoperative and postoperative outcomes in           smoking cessation, and nicotine replacement          choice. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(4):1569-1576.
                       low-risk patients awaiting elective coronary artery  therapy: a systematic review. Ann Surg. 2012;255     doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.09.046
                       bypass graft surgery: a randomized, controlled trial. (6):1069-1079. doi:10.1097/SLA.0b013e31824f632d     66. Trent Magruder J, Grimm JC, Dungan SP, et al.
                       Ann Intern Med. 2000;133(4):253-262. doi:10.         53. Wong J, Lam DP, Abrishami A, Chan MT,            Continuous intraoperative cefazolin infusion may
                       7326/0003-4819-133-4-200008150-00007                 Chung F. Short-term preoperative smoking             reduce surgical site infections during cardiac
                       39. Sawatzky JA, Kehler DS, Ready AE, et al.         cessation and postoperative complications:           surgical procedures: a propensity-matched analysis.
                       Prehabilitation program for elective coronary artery a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2015;29(6):1582-1587.
                       bypass graft surgery patients: a pilot randomized    2012;59(3):268-279. doi:10.1007/s12630-011-          doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2015.03.026
                       controlled study. Clin Rehabil. 2014;28(7):648-657.  9652-x                                               67. Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K. Preoperative hair
                       doi:10.1177/0269215513516475                         54. Oppedal K, Møller AM, Pedersen B,                removal to reduce surgical site infection. Cochrane
                       40. Stammers AN, Kehler DS, Afilalo J, et al.        Tønnesen H. Preoperative alcohol cessation prior     Database Syst Rev. 2011;(11):CD004122.
                       Protocol for the PREHAB study—Pre-operative          to elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.     68. Leaper D, Burman-Roy S, Palanca A, et al;
                       Rehabilitation for Reduction of Hospitalization      2012;(7):CD008343.                                   Guideline Development Group. Prevention and
                       After Coronary Bypass and Valvular Surgery:          55. Lavallée JF, Gray TA, Dumville J, Russell W,     treatment of surgical site infection: summary of
                       a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2015;5(3):  Cullum N. The effects of care bundles on patient     NICE guidance. BMJ. 2008;337:a1924. doi:10.1136/
                       e007250. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-007250             outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.     bmj.a1924
                       41. Snowden CP, Prentis J, Jacques B, et al.         Implement Sci. 2017;12(1):142. doi:10.1186/s13012-   69. Ban KA, Minei JP, Laronga C, et al. American
                       Cardiorespiratory fitness predicts mortality and     017-0670-0                                           College of Surgeons and Surgical Infection Society:
                       hospital length of stay after major elective surgery 56. Mutters NT, De Angelis G, Restuccia G, et al.    surgical site infection guidelines, 2016 update. JAm
                       in older people. Ann Surg. 2013;257(6):999-1004.     Use of evidence-based recommendations in an          Coll Surg. 2017;224(1):59-74. doi:10.1016/j.
                       doi:10.1097/SLA.0b013e31828dbac2                     antibiotic care bundle for the intensive care unit. Int jamcollsurg.2016.10.029
                       42. Valkenet K, van de Port IG, Dronkers JJ,         J Antimicrob Agents. 2018;51(1):65-70. doi:10.1016/  70. Keenan JE, Speicher PJ, Thacker JK, Walter M,
                       de Vries WR, Lindeman E, Backx FJ. The effects of    j.ijantimicag.2017.06.020                            Kuchibhatla M, Mantyh CR. The preventive surgical
                       preoperative exercise therapy on postoperative       57. Lazar HL, Salm TV, Engelman R, Orgill D,         site infection bundle in colorectal surgery: an
                       outcome: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil. 2011;25  Gordon S. Prevention and management of sternal       effective approach to surgical site infection
                       (2):99-111. doi:10.1177/0269215510380830             wound infections. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;    reduction and health care cost savings. JAMA Surg.
                       43. Waite I, Deshpande R, Baghai M, Massey T,        152(4):962-972. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2016.01.060      2014;149(10):1045-1052. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.
                       Wendler O, Greenwood S. Home-based                   58. Bode LG, Kluytmans JA, Wertheim HF, et al.       2014.346
                       preoperative rehabilitation (prehab) to improve      Preventing surgical-site infections in nasal carriers 71. Grocott HP, Mackensen GB, Grigore AM, et al;
                       physical function and reduce hospital length of stay of Staphylococcus aureus. N Engl J Med. 2010;        Neurologic Outcome Research Group (NORG);
                       for frail patients undergoing coronary artery bypass 362(1):9-17. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0808939               Cardiothoracic Anesthesiology Research Endeavors
                       graft and valve surgery. J Cardiothorac Surg.2017;                                                        (CARE) Investigators’ of the Duke Heart Center.
                       12(1):91. doi:10.1186/s13019-017-0655-8              59. Paling FP, Olsen K, Ohneberg K, et al. Risk
                                                                            prediction for Staphylococcus aureus surgical site   Postoperative hyperthermia is associated with
                       44. Orange ST, Northgraves MJ, Marshall P,           infection following cardiothoracic surgery:          cognitive dysfunction after coronary artery bypass
                       Madden LA, Vince RV. Exercise prehabilitation in     a secondary analysis of the V710-P003 trial. PLoS    graft surgery. Stroke. 2002;33(2):537-541. doi:10.
                       elective intra-cavity surgery: A role within the ERAS One. 2018;13(3):e0193445. doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 1161/hs0202.102600
                       pathway? a narrative review. Int J Surg. 2018;56:    0193445                                              72. Groom RC, Rassias AJ, Cormack JE, et al;
                       328-333. doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2018.04.054
                                                                            60. Courville XF, Tomek IM, Kirkland KB, Birhle M,   Northern New England Cardiovascular Disease
                       45. Barberan-Garcia A, Ubré M, Roca J, et al.        Kantor SR, Finlayson SR. Cost-effectiveness of       Study Group. Highest core temperature during
                       Personalised prehabilitation in high-risk patients   preoperative nasal mupirocin treatment in            cardiopulmonary bypass and rate of mediastinitis.
                       undergoing elective major abdominal surgery:         preventing surgical site infection in patients       Perfusion. 2004;19(2):119-125. doi:10.1191/
                       a randomized blinded controlled trial. Ann Surg.     undergoing total hip and knee arthroplasty:          0267659104pf731oa
                       2018;267(1):50-56. doi:10.1097/SLA.                  a cost-effectiveness analysis. Infect Control Hosp   73. Newland RF, Baker RA, Mazzone AL, Quinn SS,
                       0000000000002293                                     Epidemiol. 2012;33(2):152-159. doi:10.1086/663704    Chew DP; Perfusion Downunder Collaboration.
                       46. Li C, Carli F, Lee L, et al. Impact of a trimodal 61. Hong JC, Saraswat MK, Ellison TA, et al.        Rewarming temperature during cardiopulmonary
                       prehabilitation program on functional recovery       Staphylococcus aureus prevention strategies in       bypass and acute kidney injury: a multicenter
                       after colorectal cancer surgery: a pilot study. Surg cardiac surgery: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann  analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101(5):1655-1662.
                       Endosc. 2013;27(4):1072-1082. doi:10.1007/s00464-    Thorac Surg. 2018;105(1):47-53. doi:10.1016/j.       doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.01.086
                       012-2560-5                                           athoracsur.2017.06.033                               74. Bar-Yosef S, Mathew JP, Newman MF,
                       47. Gillis C, Li C, Lee L, et al. Prehabilitation versus 62. Murphy E, Spencer SJ, Young D, Jones B,      Landolfo KP, Grocott HP; Neurological Outcome
                       rehabilitation: a randomized control trial in patients Blyth MJ. MRSA colonisation and subsequent risk    Research Group;CAREInvestigators of the Duke
                       undergoing colorectal resection for cancer.          of infection despite effective eradication in        Heart Center. Prevention of cerebral hyperthermia
                       Anesthesiology. 2014;121(5):937-947. doi:10.1097/    orthopaedic elective surgery. J Bone Joint Surg Br.  during cardiac surgery by limiting on-bypass
                       ALN.0000000000000393                                 2011;93(4):548-551. doi:10.1302/0301-620X.93B4.      rewarming in combination with post-bypass body
                       48. Reid MC, Fiellin DA, O’Connor PG. Hazardous      24969                                                surface warming: a feasibility study. Anesth Analg.
                       and harmful alcohol consumption in primary care.                                                          2004;99(3):641-646. doi:10.1213/01.ANE.
                                                                            63. Cimochowski GE, Harostock MD, Brown R,           0000130354.90659.63
                       Arch Intern Med. 1999;159(15):1681-1689. doi:10.     Bernardi M, Alonzo N, Coyle K. Intranasal mupirocin
                       1001/archinte.159.15.1681                            reduces sternal wound infection after open heart     75. Allen KB, Thourani VH, Naka Y, et al.
                       49. Gaskill CE, Kling CE, Varghese TK Jr, et al.     surgery in diabetics and nondiabetics. Ann Thorac    Randomized, multicenter trial comparing
                       Financial benefit of a smoking cessation program     Surg. 2001;71(5):1572-1578. doi:10.1016/S0003-       sternotomy closure with rigid plate fixation to wire
                       prior to elective colorectal surgery. J Surg Res.2017; 4975(01)02519-X                                    cerclage. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153(4):
                                                                                                                                 888-896.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2016.10.093
                       215:183-189. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2017.03.067           64. Edwards FH, Engelman RM, Houck P,
                       50. Levett DZ, Edwards M, Grocott M, Mythen M.       Shahian DM, Bridges CR; Society of Thoracic          76. Allen KB, Thourani VH, Naka Y, et al. Rigid plate
                       Preparing the patient for surgery to improve         Surgeons. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons           fixation versus wire cerclage: patient-reported and
                       outcomes. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2016;    practice guideline series: antibiotic prophylaxis in economic outcomes from a randomized trial. Ann
                       30(2):145-157. doi:10.1016/j.bpa.2016.04.002         cardiac surgery, part I: duration. Ann Thorac Surg.  Thorac Surg. 2018;105(5):1344-1350. doi:10.1016/j.
                                                                                                                                 athoracsur.2017.12.011

                       jamasurgery.com                                                                          (Reprinted)   JAMA Surgery     August 2019   Volume 154, Number 8      763

                                                                 © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                       Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                                                         Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery


                       77. Park JS, Kuo JH, Young JN, Wong MS. Rigid        91. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al.   orthopaedic surgery with spinal anaesthesia and
                       sternal fixation versus modified wire technique for  Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. I.M. ketorolac as the first postoperative analgesic.
                       poststernotomy closures: a retrospective cost        N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1359-1367. doi:10.1056/   Br J Anaesth. 1995;74(3):257-260. doi:10.1093/bja/
                       analysis. Ann Plast Surg. 2017;78(5):537-542.        NEJMoa011300                                         74.3.257
                       doi:10.1097/SAP.0000000000000901                     92. Gianotti L, Biffi R, Sandini M, et al. Preoperative 105. Apfel CC, Turan A, Souza K, Pergolizzi J,
                       78. Nazerali RS, Hinchcliff K, Wong MS. Rigid        Oral Carbohydrate Load Versus Placebo in Major       Hornuss C. Intravenous acetaminophen reduces
                       fixation for the prevention and treatment of sternal Elective Abdominal Surgery (PROCY):                  postoperative nausea and vomiting: a systematic
                       complications. Ann Plast Surg. 2014;72(suppl 1):     a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter,       review and meta-analysis. Pain. 2013;154(5):677-689.
                       S27-S30. doi:10.1097/SAP.0000000000000155            phase III trial. Ann Surg. 2018;267(4):623-630.      doi:10.1016/j.pain.2012.12.025
                       79. Raman J, Lehmann S, Zehr K, et al. Sternal       doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000002325                     106. Radbruch L, Glaeske G, Grond S, et al. Topical
                       closure with rigid plate fixation versus wire closure: 93. Williams JB, McConnell G, Allender JE, et al.  review on the abuse and misuse potential of
                       a randomized controlled multicenter trial. Ann       One-year results from the first US-based enhanced    tramadol and tilidine in Germany. Subst Abus. 2013;
                       Thorac Surg. 2012;94(6):1854-1861. doi:10.1016/j.    recovery after cardiac surgery (ERAS cardiac)        34(3):313-320. doi:10.1080/08897077.2012.735216
                       athoracsur.2012.07.085                               program. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;pii:         107. But AK, Erdil F, Yucel A, Gedik E, Durmus M,
                       80. Christensen MC, Dziewior F, Kempel A,            S0022-5223(18)33225-2.                               Ersoy MO. The effects of single-dose tramadol on
                       von Heymann C. Increased chest tube drainage is      94. Greisen J, Nielsen DV, Sloth E, Jakobsen CJ.     post-operative pain and morphine requirements
                       independently associated with adverse outcome        High thoracic epidural analgesia decreases stress    after coronary artery bypass surgery. Acta
                       after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth.   hyperglycemia and insulin need in cardiac surgery    Anaesthesiol Scand. 2007;51(5):601-606. doi:10.
                       2012;26(1):46-51. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2011.09.021     patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2013;57(2):171-177. 1111/j.1399-6576.2007.01275.x
                       81. Dyke C, Aronson S, Dietrich W, et al. Universal  doi:10.1111/j.1399-6576.2012.02731.x                 108. Joshi SS, Jagadeesh AM. Efficacy of
                       definition of perioperative bleeding in adult cardiac 95. Lazar HL, Chipkin SR, Fitzgerald CA, Bao Y,     perioperative pregabalin in acute and chronic
                       surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147(5):      Cabral H, Apstein CS. Tight glycemic control in      post-operative pain after off-pump coronary artery
                       1458-1463.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.10.070        diabetic coronary artery bypass graft patients       bypass surgery: a randomized, double-blind
                       82. Ferraris VA, Brown JR, Despotis GJ, et al;       improves perioperative outcomes and decreases        placebo controlled trial. Ann Card Anaesth. 2013;16
                       Society of Thoracic Surgeons Blood Conservation      recurrent ischemic events. Circulation. 2004;109     (3):180-185. doi:10.4103/0971-9784.114239
                       Guideline Task Force; Society of Cardiovascular      (12):1497-1502. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000121747.       109. Borde DP, Futane SS, Asegaonkar B, et al.
                       Anesthesiologists Special Task Force on Blood        71054.79                                             Effect of perioperative pregabalin on postoperative
                       Transfusion; International Consortium for Evidence   96. Furnary AP, Wu Y. Eliminating the diabetic       quality of recovery in patients undergoing off-pump
                       Based Perfusion. 2011 update to the Society of       disadvantage: the Portland Diabetic Project. Semin   coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCABG):
                       Thoracic Surgeons and the Society of                 Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;18(4):302-308.          a prospective, randomized, double-blind trial.
                       Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists blood               doi:10.1053/j.semtcvs.2006.04.005                    J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2017;31(4):1241-1245.
                       conservation clinical practice guidelines. Ann       97. Chaney MA, Nikolov MP, Blakeman BP,              doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2016.09.029
                       Thorac Surg. 2011;91(3):944-982. doi:10.1016/j.      Bakhos M. Attempting to maintain normoglycemia       110. Menda F, Köner O, Sayın M, Ergenoğlu M,
                       athoracsur.2010.11.078                               during cardiopulmonary bypass with insulin may       Küçükaksu S, Aykaç B. Effects of single-dose
                       83. Pagano D, Milojevic M, Meesters MI, et al.       initiate postoperative hypoglycemia. Anesth Analg.   gabapentin on postoperative pain and morphine
                       2017 EACTS/EACTA Guidelines on patient blood         1999;89(5):1091-1095. doi:10.1213/00000539-          consumption after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac
                       management for adult cardiac surgery. Eur J          199911000-00004                                      Vasc Anesth. 2010;24(5):808-813. doi:10.1053/j.
                       Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;53(1):79-111. doi:10.1093/   98. Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive jvca.2009.10.023
                       ejcts/ezx325                                         intraoperative insulin therapy versus conventional   111. Khalil MA, Abdel Azeem MS. The impact of
                       84. Myles PS, Smith JA, Forbes A, et al; ATACAS      glucose management during cardiac surgery:           dexmedetomidine infusion in sparing morphine
                       Investigators of the ANZCA Clinical Trials Network.  a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(4):     consumption in off-pump coronary artery bypass
                       Tranexamic acid in patients undergoing               233-243. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-146-4-                grafting. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013;17
                       coronary-artery surgery. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(2):  200702200-00002                                      (1):66-71. doi:10.1177/1089253212463969
                       136-148. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1606424                   99. White PF, Kehlet H, Neal JM, Schricker T,        112. Ji F, Li Z, Young N, Moore P, Liu H.
                       85. Koster A, Faraoni D, Levy JH. Antifibrinolytic   Carr DB, Carli F; Fast-Track Surgery Study Group.    Perioperative dexmedetomidine improves
                       therapy for cardiac surgery: an update.              The role of the anesthesiologist in fast-track       mortality in patients undergoing coronary artery
                       Anesthesiology. 2015;123(1):214-221. doi:10.1097/ALN. surgery: from multimodal analgesia to perioperative bypass surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2014;
                       0000000000000688                                     medical care. Anesth Analg. 2007;104(6):1380-1396.   28(2):267-273. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2013.06.022
                       86. Levy JH, Koster A, Quinones QJ, Milling TJ,      doi:10.1213/01.ane.0000263034.96885.e1               113. Liu X, Xie G, Zhang K, et al. Dexmedetomidine
                       Key NS. Antifibrinolytic therapy and perioperative   100. Wick EC, Grant MC, Wu CL. Postoperative         vs propofol sedation reduces delirium in patients
                       considerations. Anesthesiology. 2018;128(3):657-670. multimodal analgesia pain management with            after cardiac surgery: A meta-analysis with trial
                       doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001997                     nonopioid analgesics and techniques: a review.       sequential analysis of randomized controlled trials.
                       87. Tengborn L, Blombäck M, Berntorp E.              JAMA Surg. 2017;152(7):691-697. doi:10.1001/         J Crit Care. 2017;38:190-196. doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.
                       Tranexamic acid—an old drug still going strong and   jamasurg.2017.0898                                   2016.10.026
                       making a revival. Thromb Res. 2015;135(2):231-242.   101. Qazi SM, Sindby EJ, Nørgaard MA.                114. Cho JS, Shim JK, Soh S, Kim MK, Kwak YL.
                       doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2014.11.012                   Ibuprofen—a safe analgesic during cardiac surgery    Perioperative dexmedetomidine reduces the
                       88. Macisaac RJ, Jerums G. Intensive glucose         recovery? a randomized controlled trial.             incidence and severity of acute kidney injury
                       control and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2        J Cardiovasc Thorac Res. 2015;7(4):141-148. doi:10.  following valvular heart surgery. Kidney Int. 2016;
                       diabetes. Heart Lung Circ. 2011;20(10):647-654.      15171/jcvtr.2015.31                                  89(3):693-700. doi:10.1038/ki.2015.306
                       doi:10.1016/j.hlc.2010.07.013                        102. Nussmeier NA, Whelton AA, Brown MT, et al.      115. Hudetz JA, Patterson KM, Iqbal Z, et al.
                       89. Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al;   Complications of the COX-2 inhibitors parecoxib      Ketamine attenuates delirium after cardiac surgery
                       American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists;   and valdecoxib after cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med.  with cardiopulmonary bypass. J Cardiothorac Vasc
                       American Diabetes Association. American              2005;352(11):1081-1091. doi:10.1056/                 Anesth. 2009;23(5):651-657. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.
                       Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and         NEJMoa050330                                         2008.12.021
                       American Diabetes Association consensus              103. Jelacic S, Bollag L, Bowdle A, Rivat C, Cain KC, 116. Faritous Z, Barzanji A, Azarfarin R, et al.
                       statement on inpatient glycemic control. Diabetes    Richebe P. Intravenous acetaminophen as an           Comparison of bispectral index monitoring with
                       Care. 2009;32(6):1119-1131. doi:10.2337/dc09-9029    adjunct analgesic in cardiac surgery reduces opioid  the critical-care pain observation tool in the pain
                       90. Selvin E, Marinopoulos S, Berkenblit G, et al.   consumption but not opioid-related adverse           assessment of intubated adult patients after cardiac
                       Meta-analysis: glycosylated hemoglobin and           effects: a randomized controlled trial.              surgery. Anesth Pain Med. 2016;6(4):e38334.
                       cardiovascular disease in diabetes mellitus. Ann     J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2016;30(4):997-1004.     doi:10.5812/aapm.38334
                       Intern Med. 2004;141(6):421-431. doi:10.7326/        doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2016.02.010                       117. Gélinas C, Fillion L, Puntillo KA, Viens C,
                       0003-4819-141-6-200409210-00007                      104. Petring OU, Dawson PJ, Blake DW, et al.         Fortier M. Validation of the critical-care pain
                                                                            Normal postoperative gastric emptying after


              764      JAMA Surgery    August 2019   Volume 154, Number 8    (Reprinted)                                                                          jamasurgery.com

                                                                 © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                       Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery                                                    Special Communication   Clinical Review & Education


                       observation tool in adult patients. Am J Crit Care.  132. Page VJ, Ely EW, Gates S, et al. Effect of      cardiac surgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg.
                       2006;15(4):420-427.                                  intravenous haloperidol on the duration of delirium  2008;7(5):888-890. doi:10.1510/icvts.2008.185413
                       118. Payen JF, Bru O, Bosson JL, et al. Assessing    and coma in critically ill patients (Hope-ICU):      147. Halm MA. To strip or not to strip? physiological
                       pain in critically ill sedated patients by using a   a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled       effects of chest tube manipulation. Am J Crit Care.
                       behavioral pain scale. Crit Care Med. 2001;29(12):   trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2013;1(7):515-523. doi:10. 2007;16(6):609-612.
                                                                            1016/S2213-2600(13)70166-8
                       2258-2263. doi:10.1097/00003246-200112000-                                                                148. Boyacıoğlu K, Kalender M, Özkaynak B,
                       00004                                                133. van den Boogaard M, Slooter AJC,                Mert B, Kayalar N, Erentuğ V. A new use of Fogarty
                       119. Rijkenberg S, Stilma W, Bosman RJ,              Brüggemann RJM, et al; REDUCE Study                  catheter: chest tube clearance. Heart Lung Circ.
                       van der Meer NJ, van der Voort PHJ. Pain             Investigators. Effect of haloperidol on survival     2014;23(10):e229-e230. doi:10.1016/j.hlc.2014.
                       measurement in mechanically ventilated patients      among critically ill adults with a high risk of delirium: 04.255
                       after cardiac surgery: comparison of the Behavioral  the REDUCE randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2018;
                                                                            319(7):680-690. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0160           149. Grieshaber P, Heim N, Herzberg M, Niemann
                       Pain Scale (BPS) and the Critical-Care Pain                                                               B, Roth P, Boening A. Active chest tube clearance
                       Observation Tool (CPOT). J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 134. Sessler DI. Perioperative heat balance.         after cardiac surgery is associated with reduced
                       2017;31(4):1227-1234. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2017.03.013 Anesthesiology. 2000;92(2):578-596. doi:10.1097/     reexploration rates. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;105(6):
                       120. Arenson BG, MacDonald LA, Grocott HP,           00000542-200002000-00042                             1771-1777. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.01.002
                       Hiebert BM, Arora RC. Effect of intensive care unit  135. Karalapillai D, Story D, Hart GK, et al.        150. Maltais S, Davis ME, Haglund NA, et al. Active
                       environment on in-hospital delirium after cardiac    Postoperative hypothermia and patient outcomes       clearance of chest tubes reduces re-exploration for
                       surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(1):172-  after elective cardiac surgery. Anaesthesia. 2011;66 bleeding after ventricular assist device
                       178. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.12.042                 (9):780-784. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2044.2011.06784.x    implantation. ASAIO J. 2016;62(6):704-709. doi:10.
                       121. Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, et al; American  136. Karalapillai D, Story D, Hart GK, et al.        1097/MAT.0000000000000437
                       College of Critical Care Medicine. Clinical practice Postoperative hypothermia and patient outcomes       151. Perrault LP, Pellerin M, Carrier M, et al.
                       guidelines for the management of pain, agitation,    after major elective non-cardiac surgery. Anaesthesia. The PleuraFlow Active chest tube clearance system:
                       and delirium in adult patients in the intensive care 2013;68(6):605-611. doi:10.1111/anae.12129           initial clinical experience in adult cardiac surgery.
                       unit. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(1):263-306. doi:10.     137. Campbell G, Alderson P, Smith AF, Warttig S.    Innovations (Phila). 2012;7(5):354-358.
                       1097/CCM.0b013e3182783b72
                                                                            Warming of intravenous and irrigation fluids for     152. Sirch J, Ledwon M, Püski T, Boyle EM,
                       122. European Delirium Association; American         preventing inadvertent perioperative hypothermia.    Pfeiffer S, Fischlein T. Active clearance of chest
                       Delirium Society. The DSM-5 criteria, level of       Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(4):CD009891.       drainage catheters reduces retained blood. J Thorac
                       arousal and delirium diagnosis: inclusiveness is     138. Engelen S, Himpe D, Borms S, et al.             Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151(3):832-838.e2. doi:10.
                       safer. BMC Med. 2014;12:141. doi:10.1186/s12916-     An evaluation of underbody forced-air and resistive  1016/j.jtcvs.2015.10.015
                       014-0141-2
                                                                            heating during hypothermic, on-pump cardiac          153. St-Onge S, Ben Ali W, Bouhout I, et al.
                       123. McPherson JA, Wagner CE, Boehm LM, et al.       surgery. Anaesthesia. 2011;66(2):104-110. doi:10.    Examining the impact of active clearance of chest
                       Delirium in the cardiovascular ICU: exploring        1111/j.1365-2044.2010.06609.x                        drainage catheters on postoperative atrial
                       modifiable risk factors [correction published in Crit 139. Grocott HP, Mathew JP, Carver EH,              fibrillation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;154(2):
                       Care Med. 2013;41(4):e41]. Crit Care Med. 2013;41    Phillips-Bute B, Landolfo KP, Newman MF; Duke        501-508. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2017.03.046
                       (2):405-413. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e31826ab49b
                                                                            Heart Center Neurologic Outcome Research Group.      154. Gercekoglu H, Aydin NB, Dagdeviren B, et al.
                       124. Milbrandt EB, Deppen S, Harrison PL, et al.     A randomized controlled trial of the Arctic Sun      Effect of timing of chest tube removal on
                       Costs associated with delirium in mechanically       temperature management system versus                 development of pericardial effusion following
                       ventilated patients. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(4):955-  conventional methods for preventing hypothermia      cardiac surgery. J Card Surg. 2003;18(3):217-224.
                       962. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000119429.16055.92          during off-pump cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg.       doi:10.1046/j.1540-8191.2003.02020.x
                       125. Rudolph JL, Inouye SK, Jones RN, et al.         2004;98(2):298-302. doi:10.1213/01.ANE.
                                                                            0000096242.06561.C0                                  155. Edelman JJ, Reddel CJ, Kritharides L, et al.
                       Delirium: an independent predictor of functional                                                          Natural history of hypercoagulability in patients
                       decline after cardiac surgery. J Am Geriatr Soc.     140. Karimov JH, Gillinov AM, Schenck L, et al.      undergoing coronary revascularization and effect
                       2010;58(4):643-649. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.    Incidence of chest tube clogging after cardiac       of preoperative myocardial infarction. J Thorac
                       02762.x                                              surgery: a single-center prospective observational   Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148(2):536-543. doi:10.1016/
                       126. Rudolph JL, Jones RN, Grande LJ, et al.         study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44(6):1029-     j.jtcvs.2013.10.028
                                                                            1036. doi:10.1093/ejcts/ezt140
                       Impaired executive function is associated with                                                            156. Parolari A, Mussoni L, Frigerio M, et al.
                       delirium after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. 141. Shalli S, Saeed D, Fukamachi K, et al. Chest    Increased prothrombotic state lasting as long as
                       J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006;54(6):937-941. doi:10.1111/j. tube selection in cardiac and thoracic surgery:      one month after on-pump and off-pump coronary
                       1532-5415.2006.00735.x                               a survey of chest tube-related complications and     surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130(2):
                       127. Maldonado JR. Neuropathogenesis of              their management.  J Card Surg. 2009;24(5):503-      303-308. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2004.11.002
                                                                            509. doi:10.1111/j.1540-8191.2009.00905.x
                       delirium: review of current etiologic theories and                                                        157. Hill J, Treasure T. Senkung des Risikos für
                       common pathways.   Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;    142. Balzer F, von Heymann C, Boyle EM,              venöse Thromboembolien bei stationären
                       21(12):1190-1222. doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2013.09.005     Wernecke KD, Grubitzsch H, Sander M. Impact          Patienten: Zusammenfassung der NICE-Leitlinien.
                       128. Bergeron N, Dubois MJ, Dumont M, Dial S,        of retained blood requiring reintervention on        Praxis (Bern). 2010;99(16):977-980. doi:10.1024/
                       Skrobik Y. Intensive Care Delirium Screening         outcomes after cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc  1661-8157/a000221
                       Checklist: evaluation of a new screening tool.       Surg. 2016;152(2):595-601.e4. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.
                                                                            2016.03.086                                          158. Kakkos SK, Caprini JA, Geroulakos G, et al.
                       Intensive Care Med. 2001;27(5):859-864. doi:10.                                                           Combined intermittent pneumatic leg compression
                       1007/s001340100909                                   143. Boyle EM Jr, Gillinov AM, Cohn WE, Ley SJ,      and pharmacological prophylaxis for prevention of
                       129. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, et al. Delirium  Fischlein T, Perrault LP. Retained blood syndrome    venous thromboembolism.   Cochrane Database Syst
                       in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and    after cardiac surgery: a new look at an old problem. Rev. 2016;9:CD005258.
                                                                            Innovations (Phila). 2015;10(5):296-303.
                       reliability of the confusion assessment method for                                                        159. Sachdeva A, Dalton M, Lees T. Graduated
                       the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA. 2001;286    144. Tauriainen TKE, Morosin MA, Airaksinen J,       compression stockings for prevention of deep vein
                       (21):2703-2710. doi:10.1001/jama.286.21.2703         Biancari F. Outcome after procedures for retained    thrombosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;11:
                       130. Siddiqi N, Harrison JK, Clegg A, et al.         blood syndrome in coronary surgery. Eur J            CD001484.
                       Interventions for preventing delirium in             Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;51(6):1078-1085. doi:10.
                                                                            1093/ejcts/ezx015                                    160. Dunning J, Versteegh M, Fabbri A, et al;
                       hospitalised non-ICU patients. Cochrane Database                                                          EACTS Audit and Guidelines Committee. Guideline
                       Syst Rev. 2016;3:CD005563.                           145. St-Onge S, Perrault LP, Demers P, et al.        on antiplatelet and anticoagulation management in
                       131. Young J, Murthy L, Westby M, Akunne A,          Pericardial blood as a trigger for postoperative atrial cardiac surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008;34
                       O’Mahony R; Guideline Development Group.             fibrillation after cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. (1):73-92. doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2008.02.024
                       Diagnosis, prevention, and management of             2018;105(1):321-328. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2017.
                                                                            07.045                                               161. Ho KM, Bham E, Pavey W. Incidence of venous
                       delirium: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2010;                                                            thromboembolism and benefits and risks of
                       341:c3704. doi:10.1136/bmj.c3704                     146. Day TG, Perring RR, Gofton K. Is manipulation   thromboprophylaxis after cardiac surgery:
                                                                            of mediastinal chest drains useful or harmful after

                       jamasurgery.com                                                                          (Reprinted)   JAMA Surgery     August 2019   Volume 154, Number 8      765

                                                                 © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                       Clinical Review & Education Special Communication                                                         Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Cardiac Surgery


                       a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart    173. Meade MO, Guyatt G, Butler R, et al. Trials     185. Dalfino L, Giglio MT, Puntillo F, Marucci M,
                       Assoc. 2015;4(10):e002652. doi:10.1161/JAHA.115.     comparing early vs late extubation following         Brienza N. Haemodynamic goal-directed therapy
                       002652                                               cardiovascular surgery. Chest. 2001;120(6)(suppl):   and postoperative infections: earlier is better, a
                       162. Ahmed AB, Koster A, Lance M, Faraoni D; ESA     445S-453S. doi:10.1378/chest.120.6_suppl.445S        systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care.
                       VTE Guidelines Task Force. European guidelines on    174. Hu J, Chen R, Liu S, Yu X, Zou J, Ding X. Global 2011;15(3):R154. doi:10.1186/cc10284
                       perioperative venous thromboembolism                 incidence and outcomes of adult patients with        186. Sun Y, Chai F, Pan C, Romeiser JL, Gan TJ.
                       prophylaxis: cardiovascular and thoracic surgery.    acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery:           Effect of perioperative goal-directed
                       Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2018;35(2):84-89.                a systematic review and meta-analysis.               hemodynamic therapy on postoperative recovery
                       163. Rajakaruna C, Rogers CA, Angelini GD, Ascione   J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2016;30(1):82-89.        following major abdominal surgery—a systematic
                       R. Risk factors for and economic implications of     doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2015.06.017                       review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
                       prolonged ventilation after cardiac surgery. J Thorac 175. Kuitunen A, Vento A, Suojaranta-Ylinen R,      trials. Crit Care. 2017;21(1):141. doi:10.1186/s13054-
                       Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130(5):1270-1277. doi:10.      Pettilä V. Acute renal failure after cardiac surgery: 017-1728-8
                       1016/j.jtcvs.2005.06.050                             evaluation of the RIFLE classification. Ann Thorac   187. Goepfert MS, Richter HP, Zu Eulenburg C, et al.
                       164. Barker J, Martino R, Reichardt B, Hickey EJ,    Surg. 2006;81(2):542-546. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.  Individually optimized hemodynamic therapy
                       Ralph-Edwards A. Incidence and impact of             2005.07.047                                          reduces complications and length of stay in the
                       dysphagia in patients receiving prolonged            176. Xie X, Wan X, Ji X, et al. Reassessment of      intensive care unit: a prospective, randomized
                       endotracheal intubation after cardiac surgery. Can J acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery:           controlled trial. Anesthesiology. 2013;119(4):824-836.
                       Surg. 2009;52(2):119-124.                            a retrospective study. Intern Med. 2017;56(3):275-   doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e31829bd770
                       165. Camp SL, Stamou SC, Stiegel RM, et al. Can      282. doi:10.2169/internalmedicine.56.7638            188. Aya HD, Cecconi M, Hamilton M, Rhodes A.
                       timing of tracheal extubation predict improved       177. Kashani K, Al-Khafaji A, Ardiles T, et al.      Goal-directed therapy in cardiac surgery:
                       outcomes after cardiac surgery? HSR Proc Intensive   Discovery and validation of cell cycle arrest        a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth.
                       Care Cardiovasc Anesth. 2009;1(2):39-47.             biomarkers in human acute kidney injury. Crit Care.  2013;110(4):510-517. doi:10.1093/bja/aet020
                       166. Camp SL, Stamou SC, Stiegel RM, et al. Quality  2013;17(1):R25. doi:10.1186/cc12503                  189. Baron DM, Hochrieser H, Posch M, et al;
                       improvement program increases early tracheal         178. Mayer T, Bolliger D, Scholz M, et al. Urine     European Surgical Outcomes Study (EuSOS) group
                       extubation rate and decreases pulmonary              biomarkers of tubular renal cell damage for the      for Trials Groups of European Society of Intensive
                       complications and resource utilization after cardiac prediction of acute kidney injury after cardiac      Care Medicine; European Society of
                       surgery. J Card Surg. 2009;24(4):414-423. doi:10.    surgery: a pilot study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth.  Anaesthesiology. Preoperative anaemia is
                       1111/j.1540-8191.2008.00783.x                        2017;31(6):2072-2079. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2017.       associated with poor clinical outcome in
                                                                            04.024                                               non-cardiac surgery patients. Br J Anaesth. 2014;113
                       167. Cheng DC, Karski J, Peniston C, et al. Morbidity                                                     (3):416-423. doi:10.1093/bja/aeu098
                       outcome in early versus conventional tracheal        179. Khwaja A. KDIGO clinical practice guidelines
                       extubation after coronary artery bypass grafting:    for acute kidney injury. Nephron Clin Pract. 2012;   190. Muñoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, et al.
                       a prospective randomized controlled trial. J Thorac  120(4):c179-c184.                                    International consensus statement on the
                                                                                                                                 peri-operative management of anaemia and iron
                       Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112(3):755-764. doi:10.        180. Meersch M, Schmidt C, Hoffmeier A, et al.
                       1016/S0022-5223(96)70062-4                                                                                deficiency. Anaesthesia. 2017;72(2):233-247. doi:10.
                                                                            Prevention of cardiac surgery-associated AKI by      1111/anae.13773
                       168. Cheng DC, Wall C, Djaiani G, et al. Randomized  implementing the KDIGO guidelines in high risk
                       assessment of resource use in fast-track cardiac     patients identified by biomarkers: the PrevAKI       191. Lannemyr L, Bragadottir G,
                       surgery 1-year after hospital discharge.             randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med.     Hjärpe A, Redfors B, Ricksten SE. Impact of
                       Anesthesiology. 2003;98(3):651-657. doi:10.1097/     2017;43(11):1551-1561. doi:10.1007/s00134-016-       cardiopulmonary bypass flow on renal oxygenation
                       00000542-200303000-00013                             4670-3                                               in patients undergoing cardiac operations. Ann
                                                                                                                                 Thorac Surg. 2019;107(2):505-511. doi:10.1016/j.
                       169. Guller U, Anstrom KJ, Holman WL, Allman RM,     181. Göcze I, Jauch D, Götz M, et al.                athoracsur.2018.08.085
                       Sansom M, Peterson ED. Outcomes of early             Biomarker-guided intervention to prevent acute
                       extubation after bypass surgery in the elderly. Ann  kidney injury after major surgery: the prospective   192. Zamani MM, Najafi A, Sehat S, et al. The effect
                       Thorac Surg. 2004;77(3):781-788. doi:10.1016/j.      randomized BigpAK study. Ann Surg. 2018;267(6):      of intraoperative lung protective ventilation vs
                       athoracsur.2003.09.059                               1013-1020. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000002485          conventional ventilation, on postoperative
                                                                                                                                 pulmonary complications after cardiopulmonary
                       170. Konstantakos AK, Lee JH. Optimizing timing      182. Vanmassenhove J, Kielstein J, Jörres A,         bypass. J Cardiovasc Thorac Res. 2017;9(4):221-228.
                       of early extubation in coronary artery bypass        Biesen WV. Management of patients at risk of acute   doi:10.15171/jcvtr.2017.38
                       surgery patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(6):       kidney injury. Lancet. 2017;389(10084):2139-2151.
                       1842-1845. doi:10.1016/S0003-4975(00)01248-0         doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31329-6                    193. Engelman RM, Rousou JA, Flack JE III, et al.
                                                                                                                                 Fast-track recovery of the coronary bypass patient.
                       171. London MJ, Shroyer AL, Coll JR, et al. Early    183. Thomson R, Meeran H, Valencia O, Al-Subaie      Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;58(6):1742-1746. doi:10.
                       extubation following cardiac surgery in a veterans   N. Goal-directed therapy after cardiac surgery and   1016/0003-4975(94)91674-8
                       population. Anesthesiology. 1998;88(6):1447-1458.    the incidence of acute kidney injury. J Crit Care.
                       doi:10.1097/00000542-199806000-00006                 2014;29(6):997-1000. doi:10.1016/j.jcrc.2014.        194. Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control
                                                                            06.011                                               postoperative pathophysiology and rehabilitation.
                       172. Flynn BC, He J, Richey M, Wirtz K, Daon E.                                                           Br J Anaesth. 1997;78(5):606-617.
                       Early extubation without increased adverse events    184. Osawa EA, Rhodes A, Landoni G, et al.
                       in high-risk cardiac surgical patients. Ann Thorac Surg. Effect of perioperative goal-directed hemodynamic
                       2019;107(2):453-459. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.  resuscitation therapy on outcomes following
                       09.034                                               cardiac surgery: a randomized clinical trial and
                                                                            systematic review. Crit Care Med. 2016;44(4):
                                                                            724-733.


              766      JAMA Surgery    August 2019   Volume 154, Number 8    (Reprinted)                                                                          jamasurgery.com

                                                                 © 2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025



