World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440
DOI 10.1007/s00268-016-3700-1

 SCIENTIFIC REVIEW

Guidelines for Perioperative Care for Liver Surgery: Enhanced
Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society Recommendations

                 1,2               1              3               4,5
Emmanuel Melloul    • Martin Hu¨bner • Michael Scott • Chris Snowden •
             6                     7                  8               9
James Prentis • Cornelis H. C. Dejong • O. James Garden • Olivier Farges •
                10                     11                    12
Norihiro Kokudo   • Jean-Nicolas Vauthey • Pierre-Alain Clavien •
Nicolas Demartines1


Published online: 22 August 2016
Ó Socie´te´ Internationale de Chirurgie 2016


   Abstract
   Background Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) is a multimodal pathway developed to overcome the delete-
   rious effect of perioperative stress after major surgery. In colorectal surgery, ERAS pathways reduced perioperative
   morbidity, hospital stay and costs. Similar concept should be applied for liver surgery. This study presents the speciﬁc
   ERAS Society recommendations for liver surgery based on the best available evidence and on expert consensus.
   Methods A systematic review was performed on ERAS for liver surgery by searching EMBASE and Medline. Five
   independent reviewers selected relevant articles. Quality of randomized trials was assessed according to the Jadad
   score and CONSORT statement. The level of evidence for each item was determined using the GRADE system. The
   Delphi method was used to validate the ﬁnal recommendations.
   Results A total of 157 full texts were screened. Thirty-seven articles were included in the systematic review, and 16 of
   the 23 standard ERAS items were studied speciﬁcally for liver surgery. Consensus was reached among experts after 3
   rounds. Prophylactic nasogastric intubation and prophylactic abdominal drainage should be omitted. The use of post-
   operative oral laxatives and minimally invasive surgery results in a quicker bowel recovery and shorter hospital stay.
   Goal-directed ﬂuid therapy with maintenance of a low intraoperative central venous pressure induces faster recovery.
   Early oral intake and mobilization are recommended. There is no evidence to prefer epidural to other types of analgesia.
   Conclusions The current ERAS recommendations were elaborated based on the best available evidence and endorsed
   by the Delphi method. Nevertheless, prospective studies need to conﬁrm the clinical use of the suggested protocol.


Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s00268-016-3700-1) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.

&  Nicolas Demartines
   demartines@chuv.ch
                                                     5  Institute of Cellular Medicine, The Medical School,
1  Department of Visceral Surgery, University Hospital  University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne,
   Lausanne, CHUV, Rue du Bugnon 46, 1011 Lausanne,     UK
   Switzerland
                                                     6  Department of Perioperative and Critical Care Medicine,
2  Recanati/Miller Transplantation Institute, Icahn School of Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
   Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA
                                                     7  Department of Surgery, Maastricht University Medical
3  Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,   Center and NUTRIM School for Translational Research in
   Guildford, UK                                        Metabolism, Maastricht, The Netherlands
4  Department of Perioperative and Critical Care Medicine, 8 Department of Clinical Surgery, School of Clinical Sciences,
   Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK            The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
                                                                                               123


2426                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

Introduction                                            The present systematic review elaborates speciﬁc ERAS
                                                     Society guidelines for enhanced recovery care after liver
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) is a multi-   surgery by systematic review of the literature and expert
modal pathway  developed  to improve recovery after  consensus with the Delphi method.
major surgery. The ERAS strategy has been validated in
colorectal surgery and is applied in other specialties
including urology, thoracic, vascular and orthopedic sur- Methods
gery [1–3]. In colorectal surgery, ERAS pathways allow
signiﬁcant reduction in postoperative complications, faster Literature search and data selection
functional recovery, shorter hospital stays and reduced
costs, even in elderly patients [4–6]. Patients within According to the PRISMA statements [14], EMBASE
ERAS pathways mainly beneﬁt from   reduced medical   and Medline (through PubMed) were searched system-
complications, while surgical morbidity remains generally atically using the medical subject headings (MeSH)
unchanged [5].                                       ‘‘Hepatectomy AND the 23 pre-, intra- and postoperative
  Liver surgery is a major and challenging procedure for validated ERAS items.’’ Only full-text articles in English
both anesthesiologists and surgeons, and for the patient. were analyzed. Eligible articles included meta-analyses,
Major morbidity ranges from 17 % in benign to 27 % in randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or prospective
malignant disease, with a mortality risk of up to 5 % [7]. In cohort studies with control group published between
particular, pulmonary complications may reach 30 % with January 1997 (1st landmark published study on ERAS
increased risk of thromboembolic events of 5 % [7–10]. In [15]) and December 1, 2015. Retrospective series were
addition, about 50 % of patients experience nausea and considered only if data of better quality could not be
adverse digestive events [11]. Perioperative stress is identiﬁed.
increased during major liver surgery, and all measures
implemented to reduce the metabolic stress response could Inclusion and exclusion criteria
potentially reduce medical complications [5]. A recent
meta-analysis demonstrated that enhanced recovery path- According to our literature search, there are no data on
ways for liver surgery was associated with a signiﬁcant the use of ERAS protocol in patients with obstructive
decrease in postoperative complications and length of jaundice or cirrhosis. The expert panel agreed in the ﬁrst
hospital stay compared to standard care [12]. However, the round of the Delphi process to focus the systematic
majority of studies including ERAS protocols in liver review on non-obstructive jaundiced patients without
surgery were performed in patients with normal liver par- cirrhosis. All types of hepatectomy according to the
enchyma, while data in cirrhotic and obstructive jaundiced Brisbane classiﬁcation were included [16]. Major hepa-
patients remained scarce. Unfortunately, published proto- tectomy was deﬁned as resection of 3 or more Couin-
cols vary widely, and actual application of the intended aud’s segments. Patients with choledocho-jejunostomy or
protocol (compliance) was provided in one single study vascular reconstruction were also included. All series
only [13]. Furthermore, hepatic and colorectal surgeries including liver transplantation and patients with addi-
differ in terms of underlying disease, comorbidities, tional non-liver surgery (e.g., hepato-pancreaticoduo-
metabolic stress response and organ-speciﬁc complica- denectomy,  colorectal-associated resection) were
tions. It is currently unclear whether the ERAS elements excluded.
validated for colorectal surgery can be extrapolated and
applied for liver surgery.                           Data extraction and quality assessment

                                                     The ﬁrst literature search was performed independently by

9                                                    5 authors (EM, MH, MS, CS and JP) in January 2015. The
   Department of HPB Surgery and Liver Transplantation, terms of interest were ﬁrst identiﬁed in the title, secondly in
   Beaujon Hospital, Clichy, France
10                                                   the abstract or medical subject headings. All studies of
   Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery Division, Department of interest were screened with thorough full-text reading. The
   Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
   Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan                    quality of RCTs included was assessed using the Jadad
                                                     score (range 0–5) and the Consolidated Standards of
11 Department of Surgical Oncology, U.T. MD Anderson
   Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA                   Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement checklist [17, 18].
                                                     According to the published ERAS recommendations for
12 Swiss Hepato-pancreato-biliary and Transplantation Center,
   Department of Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, pancreaticoduodenectomy [19], the level of evidence for
   Switzerland                                       each  item  was  determined using  the Grading  of
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                                 2427

Table 1 Summary of ERAS recommendations for each item and the respective level of evidence
ERAS items             Summary                                             Evidence level        Grade of
                                                                                                 recommendation

1. Preoperative        Patients should receive routine dedicated preoperative Moderate           Strong
  counseling             counseling and education before liver surgery
2. Perioperative nutrition Patients at risk (weight loss [10–15 % within 6 months, High          Strong
                         BMI \ 18.5 kg/m2 and serum albumin \30 g/l in the
                         absence of liver or renal dysfunction) should receive oral
                         nutritional supplements for 7 days prior to surgery. For
                         severely malnourished patients ([10 % WL), surgery
                         should be postponed for at least 2 weeks to improve
                         nutritional status and allow patients to gain weight
3. Perioperative oral  There is limited evidence for the use of IN in liver surgery Low          Weak
  immunonutrition
4. Preoperative fasting Preoperative fasting does not need to exceed 6 h for solids No preoperative fasting No preoperative fasting
  and preoperative       and 2 h for liquids. Carbohydrate loading is recommended more than 6 h:   more than 6 h: strong
  carbohydrates load     the evening before liver surgery and 2 h before induction moderate      Carbohydrate loading:
                         of anesthesia                                     Carbohydrate loading:  weak
                                                                            low
5. Oral bowel preparation Oral MBP is not indicated before liver surgery   Low                   Weak
6. Pre-anesthetic      Long-acting anxiolytic drugs should be avoided. Short-acting Moderate     Strong
  medication             anxiolytics may be used to perform regional analgesia prior
                         to the induction of anesthesia
7. Anti-thrombotic     LMWH or unfragmented heparin reduces the risk of    Use of heparin:       Use of heparin: strong
  prophylaxis            thromboembolic complications and should be started  moderate            Use of intermittent
                         2–12 h before surgery, particularly in major hepatectomy. Use of intermittent pneumatic
                         Intermittent pneumatic compression stockings should be pneumatic         compression devices:
                         added to further decrease this risk                compression devices:  weak
                                                                            low
8. Perioperative steroids Steroids (methylprednisolone) may be used before Moderate              Weak
  administration         hepatectomy in normal liver parenchyma, since it decreases
                         liver injury and intraoperative stress, without increasing the
                         risk of complications. Steroids should not be given in
                         diabetic patients
9. Antimicrobial       Single dose Intravenous antibiotics should be administered Antimicrobial  Antimicrobial
  prophylaxis and skin   before skin incision and less than 1 h before hepatectomy. prophylaxis:   prophylaxis: strong
  preparation            Postoperative ‘‘prophylactic’’ antibiotics are not  moderate            Skin preparation: strong
                         recommended                                       Skin preparation:
                       Skin preparation with chlorhexidine 2 % is superior to moderate
                        povidone-iodine solution
10. Incision           The choice of incision is at the surgeon’s discretion. It Moderate        Strong
                         depends on the patient’s abdominal shape and location in
                         the liver of the lesion to be resected. Mercedes-type
                         incision should be avoided due to higher incisional hernia
                         risk
11. Minimally invasive LLR can be performed by hepato-biliary surgeons     Minimally invasive    Minimally invasive
  approach               experienced in laparoscopic surgery, in particular left approach: moderate approach: strong
                         lateral sectionectomy and resections of lesions located in Robotic surgery: low Robotic surgery: weak
                         anterior segments
                       There is currently no proven advantage of robotic liver
                        resection in ERAS. Its use should be reserved for clinical
                        trials
12. Prophylactic       Prophylactic nasogastric intubation increases the risk of High            Strong
  Nasogastric intubation pulmonary complications after hepatectomy. Its routine use
                         is not indicated
13. Prophylactic       The available evidence is non-conclusive and no     Low                   Weak
  abdominal drainage     recommendation can be given for the use of prophylactic
                         drainage or against it after hepatectomy

                                                                                                            123


2428                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

Table 1 continued
ERAS items             Summary                                             Evidence level        Grade of
                                                                                                 recommendation

14. Preventing         Perioperative normothermia should be maintained during Moderate           Strong
  intraoperative         liver resection
  hypothermia
15. Postoperative      Most patients can eat normal food at day one after liver Early oral intake: Early oral intake: strong
  nutrition and early oral surgery. Postoperative enteral or parenteral feeding should moderate  Oral nutritional
  intake                 be reserved for malnourished patients or those with Oral nutritional     supplements: weak
                         prolonged fasting due to complications (e.g., ileus[5 days,
                                                                            supplements:         No routine postoperative
                         delayed gastric emptying)
                                                                            moderate              artiﬁcial nutrition:
                                                                           No routine             strong
                                                                            postoperative artiﬁcial
                                                                            nutrition: high
16. Postoperative      Insulin therapy to maintain normoglycemia is recommended Moderate         Strong
  glycaemic control
17. Prevention of delayed An omentum ﬂap to cover the cut surface of the liver reduces High      Strong
  gastric emptying       the risk of DGE after left-sided hepatectomy
  (DGE)
18. Stimulation of bowel Stimulation of bowel movement after liver surgery is not High           Strong
  movement               indicated
19. Early mobilization Early mobilization after hepatectomy should be encouraged Low             Weak
                         from the morning after the operation until hospital
                         discharge
20. Analgesia          Routine TEA cannot be recommended in open liver surgery Moderate          Strong
                         for ERAS patients. Wound infusion catheter or intrathecal
                         opiates can be good alternatives combined with multimodal
                         analgesia
21. Preventing         Multimodal approach to PONV should be used. Patients Moderate             Strong
  postoperative nausea   should receive PONV prophylaxis with 2 anti-emetic drugs
  and vomiting (PONV)
22. Fluid management   The maintenance of low CVP (below 5 cmH2O) with close Moderate            Strong
                         monitoring during hepatic surgery is advocated. Balanced
                         crystalloid should be preferred over 0.9 % saline or
                         colloids to maintain intravascular volume and avoid
                         hyperchloremic acidosis or renal dysfunction, respectively
23. Audit              Systematic audit improves compliance and clinical outcome Moderate        Strong
                         in healthcare practice


Recommendations Assessment Development and Evalua-          Modiﬁed Delphi method
tion (GRADE) system, in which the level of evidence was
classiﬁed as high, moderate, low or very low [20]. The      A 3-round Web-based Delphi approach was used in this
research team (EM, MH, ND) made a ﬁnal decision on          consensus process [21]. Surgical program directors, chair-
inclusion of a study or not and was responsible for drafting men of liver surgery departments, academic surgeons and
the ﬁrst manuscript.                                        anesthesiologists with publications involving ERAS and/or
                                                            liver surgery were identiﬁed using PubMed database. They
                                                            were deemed as ‘‘experts’’and were separated from the list of
Items analyzed                                              authors. To ensure the international standpoint to this con-
                                                            sensus, we aimed to recruit a panel of experts from America,
The classical 23 ERAS items validated for colorectal sur-   Asia and Europe. A recruitment letter in English was sent via
gery were analyzed for liver surgery (Table 1). When only   e-mail providing a brief outline of the project and its
evidence in colorectal surgery was found for an item, it was objectives. If invited experts did not respond to the invitation
searched for any evidence or rationale that this item should within 2 weeks, a reminder was sent out. Further experts
not be used in liver surgery.                               were invited if no answer came in the next 2 weeks or the

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                                 2429

Fig. 1 PRISMA ﬂow diagram

                                             1867 records identified 
                                    through EMBASE and Medline database search 
                               Identification  


                                        1867 records screened (title/abstract)       1710 records excluded 
                               Screening  


                                                                                120 full text articles excluded due to: 
                                                                                - Clinical outcome not addressed 
                                     157 full text articles assessed for eligibility  
                                                                                - Inadequate control/no control 
                                                                                - Mixed surgical procedure  
                               Eligibility  


                                        37 studies included in final analysis 
                               Included  


Table 2 RCTs dedicated to liver surgery selected in the systematic review with the level of evidence
Author      Year   Jadad   Level     Studied items                   Morbidity                            LOS
                   score   evidence

Lassen      2008   6       1         Postoperative artiﬁcial nutrition No difference                      No difference
Darouiche   2010   4       1         Skin preparation                Preoperative cleansing with chlorhexidine Not assessed
                                                                       is superior to povidone-iodine for
                                                                       preventing SSI
Hayashi     2011   7       1         Perioperative steroids          Positive impact on liver function. No No difference
                                       administration                  difference in complications
Wong        2007   5       2         Preventing intraoperative       Perioperative warming reduce blood loss No difference
                                       hypothermia                     and complications
Okabayashi  2009   3       2         Postoperative glycaemic control Intensive insulin therapy using a closed- Decreased
                                                                       loop system lower SSI
Pessaux     2007   5       2         Prophylactic Nasogastric        NGT has no advantage. NGT increased  No difference
                                       intubation (NGT)                the risk of pulmonary complications
Igami       2011   4       2         Prevention of delayed gastric   DGE reduced with omental ﬂap on the cut Not assessed
                                       emptying (DGE)                  surface after left-sided hepatectomy
Yoshida     2005   3       2         Prevention of delayed gastric   DGE reduced with omental ﬂap on the cut Not assessed
                                       emptying (DGE)                  surface after left-sided hepatectomy
Hendry      2010   2       2         Use of postoperative laxatives  Earlier passage of ﬁrst stool, no change in Decreased
                                                                       morbidity
Jones       2013   7       1         Goal-directed ﬂuid therapy      Decreased                            Decreased
LOS length of hospital stay

expert declined to participate in the study. A   positive   each ERAS item using the text editor track change system.
response to the recruitment letter served as informed consent. The research team served in the role of facilitator, under-
  In all 3 rounds, the manuscript was distributed by e-mail taking the synthesis between rounds. The process of syn-
via a secured Web link. As previously validated, a modiﬁed  thesis included   discussion among   the research   team,
Delphi process was used [22]. Each expert was asked to      exploring all expert opinions, disagreements and sugges-
comment and edit anonymously the recommendations for        tions for change, before synthesized recommendations

                                                                                                            123


2430                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

Table 3 Items with\75 % expert agreement in rounds 1 and 2 of the anesthesiologist (origin UK) and the others were liver surgeon.
Delphi process                                       One expert originates from America, 1 from Japan, 1 from
Item                          Round of    %of        Netherlands, 2 from England, 1 from France and 1 from
                              disagreement agreement Switzerland. After 3 rounds, all recommendationswere agreed
Perioperative oral immunonutrition 1      42         between the experts with a minimum of 75 %. Tables 3
Perioperative steroids administration 1/2 42/71      summarize the items with\75 % agreement in rounds 1 and 2.
Epidural analgesia            1           42
Minimally invasive surgery    1           71
                                                     ERAS recommendations
Robotic surgery               1           57
Fluid management              1/2         29/71
                                                     1.  Preoperative counseling
Prophylactic abdominal drainage 1         71
                                                     There are no studies evaluating the therapeutic effect of
were drafted for each subsequent round. Consensus was preoperative counseling and patient education before liver
deﬁned as agreement by [75 % of raters (i.e., 6 of the 7 surgery. However, it is documented that patient decision aids
experts) [23].                                       such as printed documents and online information sources
                                                     increase the involvement of patients in decision-making
                                                     process and also increase the value of informed consent [24].
Results                                              In addition, leaﬂets or multimedia information regarding the
                                                     procedure and details of the patients’ postoperative tasks
The electronic search yielded 1867 potential studies. The improve results of perioperative feeding, mobilization and
selection process according to PRISMA guidelines is dis- respiratory physiotherapy, thereby reducing complications
played in Fig. 1.                                    after major abdominal surgery [1, 19].
  Overall 10 RCTs, 3 prospective case series, 5 retro-  Recommendation:  Patients should receive routine
spective case control series, 16 meta-analyses, 2 systematic dedicated preoperative counseling and education
reviews and one expert opinion study were included in the before liver surgery.
analysis. The overall quality of RCTs was high (Table 2); 9 Evidence level: moderate
RCTs had a Jadad score C3. Among the 23 published       Grade: strong
ERAS   items for colorectal surgery, 16 were studied
speciﬁcally for liver surgery (perioperative oral nutrition,
perioperative oral immunonutrition, treatment with carbo- 2. Perioperative nutrition
hydrates, postoperative artiﬁcial nutrition, anti-thrombotic
prophylaxis, antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin prepara- Malnutrition is an important modiﬁable risk factor for
tion, type of incision, no routine resection site drainage, adverse outcomes after major surgery. Routine nutritional
minimally  invasive approach,  perioperative steroid screening should be mandatory for all patients undergoing
administration, postoperative glycaemic control, no pro- major surgery [25–27]. Several screening tools are avail-
phylactic nasogastric intubation, prevention of delayed able, and their usefulness in clinical practice is demon-
gastric emptying, laxatives use, multimodal analgesia and strated. The Nutritional Risk Score (NRS), the Malnutrition
                                                     Universal Screening Tool          Subjective Global
stringent ﬂuid management). Seven items were not studied                      and  the
in liver surgery patients, and data were extrapolated from Assessment (SGA) deserve particular mention [25, 28].
previous studies in colorectal surgery (preoperative coun- According to the ESPEN guidelines, delaying surgery to
seling, no preoperative fasting, early mobilization, audit, allow for preoperative enteral nutrition (for at least
early oral nutrition, prevention of postoperative nausea and 2 weeks) is recommended in patients with at least one of
                                                     the following criteria: weight loss [10–15 % within
vomiting (PONV) and prevention of postoperative ileus).                       2
The summary and grading of recommendations with their 6 months, BMI \ 18.5 kg/m and serum albumin \30 g/l
respective level of evidence are depicted in Table 1, and (with no evidence of hepatic or renal dysfunction) [25, 28].
the results of the liver-speciﬁc studies used for the analysis Current recommendations suggest 5–7 days of oral sup-
are summarized in Table 2 (and suppl. Table 1).      plements before surgery in patients at risk of malnutrition
                                                     [25, 28]. In severely undernourished patients who cannot
Delphi process results                               be fed adequately orally or enterally, parenteral nutrition is
                                                     recommended (Grade A) [29].
The response rate was 100 % after the ﬁrst invitation (7 Recommendation: Patients at risk (weight loss
experts invited). Among the experts, one of the 7 was an [10–15 % within 6 months, BMI \ 18.5 kg/m2, and
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                   2431

  serum  albumin \30 g/l in the absence of liver or  5.  Oral bowel preparation
  renal dysfunction) should receive oral nutritional
                                                        Mechanical bowel preparation (MBP) may lead to ﬂuid
  supplements for 7 days prior to surgery. For severely
                                                     and electrolyte imbalances [37]. There are neither studies
  malnourished patients ([10 % WL), surgery should
                                                     nor evidences about MBP before liver surgery.
  be postponed for at least 2 weeks to improve nutri-
  tional status and allow patients to gain weight.      Recommendation:  Oral MBP is not indicated before
  Evidence level: high                                  liver surgery.
  Grade of recommendation:  strong                      Evidence level: low
                                                        Grade of recommendation: weak

3.  Perioperative oral immunonutrition
                                                     6.  Pre-anesthetic medication
  Immunonutrition (IN) contains x-3 fatty acids, arginine
and nucleic acids. So far, the only randomized study on A recent Cochrane review on premedication for day case
nutrition and liver resection included 26 patients only [30], surgery in adults suggested that patients receiving oral
and no meaningful difference was reported. The ongoing anxiolytics showed impairment of psychomotor function
PROPILS trial is likely to deliver a deﬁnitive answer: 200 4 h postoperatively, which reduced the patient’s ability to
IN patients will be compared to 200 patients receiving mobilize, eat and drink [38]. This may also hold in patients
isocaloric isonitrogenous nutrition for 7 days before liver with impaired liver function after resection, and long-act-
resection with overall complications as primary endpoint ing sedative premedication should be avoided. In selected
[31].                                                cases, short-acting anxiolytics may be administered, to
                                                     facilitate regional anesthesia prior to general anesthesia
  Recommendation:  There is limited evidence for the
                                                     induction.
  use of IN in liver surgery.
  Evidence level: low                                   Recommendations:  Long-acting anxiolytic drugs
  Grade of recommendation:  weak                        should be avoided. Short-acting anxiolytics may be
                                                        used to perform regional analgesia prior to the
                                                        induction of anesthesia.
4.  Preoperative fasting and preoperative carbohydrate  Evidence level: moderate
    load                                                Grade of recommendation: strong
  Preoperative fasting no more than 2 h for liquids and 6 h 7. Anti-thrombotic prophylaxis
for solid food has proven to be safe and is recommended
for digestive surgery [32]. A recent systematic review  Major hepatectomy in a normal liver parenchyma is an
included 17 randomized trials with 1445 surgical patients independent risk factor for postoperative PE [9]. In a large
[33]. Patients receiving carbohydrates had less periopera- comparative cohort study (n = 419), patients treated with
tive insulin resistance and fewer symptoms like malaise, postoperative thrombo-prophylaxis beginning at day 1 after
hunger, thirst, nausea or anxiety. No difference in terms of major hepatectomy had lower postoperative symptomatic
complications was observed, but one study demonstrated venous thromboembolism (VTE) [39]. LMWH or unfrag-
reduced hospital stay [33]. Carbohydrate loading is ﬁrmly mented heparin treatment should be initiated 2–12 h before
established in colorectal guidelines [34, 35] and may be surgery and continued until patients are fully mobile [19].
recommended in major liver surgery, since some data in Of note, possible interference with the use of epidural
the literature support the deleterious effect of insulin analgesia still needs to be assessed. The heparin should be
resistance on liver regeneration [36].               administered 12 h prior to insertion of epidural catheter.
                                                     A Cochrane meta-analysis supports continued treatment for
  Recommendation:   Preoperative fasting does not
                                                     4 weeks after hospital discharge particularly in oncologic
  need to exceed 6 h for solids and 2 h for liquids.
                                                     patients [40]. In addition, the use of compressive stockings
  Carbohydrate loading is recommended the evening
                                                     and intermittent pneumatic compression devices can fur-
  before liver surgery and 2 h before induction of
                                                     ther decrease this risk [35].
  anesthesia.
  Evidence level: No preoperative fasting more than     Recommendation:  LMWH or unfragmented heparin
  6 h: moderate; Carbohydrate loading: low              reduces the risk of thromboembolic complications
  Grade of recommendation: No preoperative fasting      and should be started 2–12 h before surgery, partic-
  more than 6 h: strong; Carbohydrate loading: weak     ularly in major hepatectomy. Intermittent pneumatic

                                                                                               123


2432                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

  compression stockings should be added to further   surgery [47]. In a recent Cochrane meta-analysis including
  decrease this risk.                                7 RCTs’ (n = 521 patients), no antimicrobial method (i.e.,
  Evidence level: Use of heparin: moderate; Use of   perioperative antibiotic therapy, pre- and probiotics
  intermittent pneumatic compression devices: low    through enteral feeding catheter) could improve outcomes
  Grade of recommendation:  Use of heparin: strong;  after liver surgery [43]. Hirokawa et al. [44] demonstrated
  Use of intermittent pneumatic compression devices: that postoperative antibiotic therapy with ﬂomoxef sodium
  weak                                               third-generation cephalosporin) every 12 h for 3 days did
                                                     not prevent postoperative infectious complications com-
                                                     pared to single preoperative administration. The adminis-
8.  Perioperative steroid administration             tration of antibiotics for 2 or 5 days after hepatectomy
                                                     without biliary reconstruction did not modify SSI and
  According to a previous meta-analysis including 5
                                                     systemic infections [45].
RCTs’ (n = 379 patients) comparing preoperative steroid
administration to placebo during liver resection, preop- Recommendation: Single dose intravenous antibi-
erative steroid use was associated with a signiﬁcant    otics should be administered before skin incision and
reduction in levels of bilirubin and interleukin 6 (IL-6) less than 1 h before hepatectomy. Postoperative
on postoperative day 1 [41]. In addition, steroid used was ‘‘prophylactic’’ antibiotics are not recommended.
associated with a trend toward lower incidence of post- Evidence level: moderate
operative complications. A more recent meta-analysis by Grade of recommendation: strong
Li et al. [42] showed contradictory results, with no
                                                        Regarding skin preparation, one single RCT (n = 100
impact on postoperative complications after liver resec-
                                                     patients) assessed the efﬁcacy of chlorhexidine gluconate
tion. Most studies used methylprednisolone at a dosage
                                                     for pre-hepatectomy skin cleansing [48]. According to this
of 30 mg/kg 30 min to 2 h prior to surgery. The use of
                                                     study, SSI (primary outcome measure) was not different
steroids in diabetics has not been studied and, since the
                                                     compared to control with saline solution only. On the other
glycaemic control is impaired after hepatectomy, it is
                                                     hand, a recently published large RCT (n = 849 patients)
best avoided in this group until further studies are
                                                     including abdominal (and liver surgery) and non-abdomi-
available.
                                                     nal types of surgery  demonstrated that preoperative
  Recommendation:    Steroids (methylprednisolone)   cleansing with chlorhexidine–alcohol 2 % was superior to
  may be used before hepatectomy in normal liver     povidone-iodine to prevent SSI [49].
  parenchyma, since it decreases liver injury and
                                                        Recommendation:  Skin preparation with chlorhexi-
  intraoperative stress, without increasing the risk of
                                                        dine 2 % is superior to povidone-iodine solution.
  complications. Steroids should not be given in dia-
                                                        Evidence level: moderate
  betic patients.
                                                        Grade of recommendation: strong
  Evidence level: moderate
  Grade of recommendation:  weak
                                                     10.  Incision
9.  Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin preparation      There are four major types of incision: median incision,
                                                     right transverse incision with vertical extension to the
  Liver surgery is classiﬁed as clean-contaminated surgery
                                                     xiphoid (J-shaped), subcostal incision extending to the left
due to bile duct transection. There is no clear evidence for
                                                     and bilateral transverse incision with vertical extension
systematic use of antimicrobial prophylaxis in liver surgery
                                                     (Mercedes-type). According to the two largest retrospec-
[43–45]. In addition, there is no evidence on the beneﬁt of
                                                     tive cohort studies (n = 1426 and 626 patients, respec-
long- or short-term antibiotic therapy in patients with
                                                     tively) including one or multiple control groups, Mercedes-
previous bile duct drainage (PBD). Up to 70 % of PBD
                                                     type incision had the highest incisional hernia risk at one
patients have positive bile cultures (4 % with MRSA) and
                                                     year [50, 51]. Of note, perioperative morbidity and pul-
are associated in up to 30 % of cases with surgical site
                                                     monary complications were similar whatever the shape of
infection (SSI), but without increased mortality or post-
                                                     the incision. For a better exposure of the hepato-caval
operative hospital stay compared to patients with negative
                                                     junction, the inverted ‘‘L incision’’ (modiﬁed Makuuchi)
bile cultures [46].
                                                     can also be used [52].
  Based on the Advisory Statement from the National
Surgical Infection Prevention Project, antibiotics should be Recommendation: The choice of incision is at the
administered before skin incision less than 1 h before  surgeon’s discretion. It depends on the patient’s

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                   2433

  abdominal shape and location in the liver of the      Recommendation:  There is currently no proven
  lesion to be resected. Mercedes-type incision should  advantage of robotic liver resection in ERAS. Its use
  be avoided due to higher incisional hernia risk.      should be reserved for clinical trials.
  Evidence level: moderate                              Evidence level: low
  Grade of recommendation:  strong                      Grade of recommendation: weak

11.  Minimally invasive approach                     12.  Prophylactic nasogastric intubation
  The Second International Consensus Conference on      Two recent Cochrane systematic reviews demonstrated
Laparoscopic Liver Resections in Morioka 2014 (Japan) that prophylactic nasogastric intubation after abdominal
concluded that minor laparoscopic liver resections (LLRs) surgery should be abandoned in favor of selective use.
had become standard practice, while major LLRs still Increased pulmonary complications and longer time to
remain  innovative procedures and  deserved further  return of bowel function were observed in patients with
investigations [53]. One single retrospective study asses- routine nasogastric tube [75]. One RCT (including 200
sed LLRs in patients within ERAS protocol and suggested patients) conﬁrmed those results after hepatectomy [76].
its feasibility with acceptable risk and possible additional
                                                        Recommendation:  Prophylactic nasogastric intuba-
accelerate recovery with reduced length of stay [54]. The
                                                        tion increases the risk of pulmonary complications
results of the ongoing  multicenter Orange-II trials
                                                        after hepatectomy. Its routine use is not indicated.
assessing open versus laparoscopic left lateral hepatic
                                                        Evidence level: high
sectionectomy within an enhanced recovery ERAS pro-
                                                        Grade of recommendation: strong
gram  may provide further evidence [55]. Twelve other
systematic reviews were identiﬁed [56–67], 9 included
meta-analysis comparing open versus laparoscopic liver
                                                     13.  Prophylactic abdominal drainage
surgery [58–60, 62–67]. These meta-analyses concluded
that LLR was associated with lower intraoperative blood The strongest evidence to omit routine prophylactic
loss, blood transfusion, postoperative complications and drainage after major abdominal surgery arises from a meta-
shorter hospital stay. In addition, LLR reduced the inci- analysis published in 2004 [77]. This meta-analysis, how-
dence of liver failure and lowered postoperative ileus, ever, included 3 RCTs on liver resection only, with low
while decreasing overall cost [60, 63, 68]. Moreover, it sample size [78, 79]. Kyoden et al. [80] assessed the value
seems that patients with LLR had a faster oral intake and of prophylactic drainage in a retrospective cohort study
required less intravenous narcotic use [66]. LLR achieved including 1269 consecutive elective liver resections. Pro-
similar short- and long-term oncologic outcomes for HCC phylactic drainage reduced the frequency of subphrenic
or colorectal liver metastases (CLM) [59, 62, 69]. Finally, abscess and biliary ﬁstula or biloma formation.
some authors advocated the systematic use of LLR for
                                                        Recommendation:  The available evidence is non-
left lateral resection in benign liver lesions and in living
                                                        conclusive and no recommendation can be given for
donors for pediatric liver living donor transplantation
                                                        the use of prophylactic drainage or against it after
[70, 71].
                                                        hepatectomy.
  Recommendation: LLR can be performed by hep-          Evidence level: low
  ato-biliary surgeons experienced in laparoscopic      Grade of recommendation: weak
  surgery, in particular left lateral sectionectomy and
  resections of lesions located in anterior segments.
  Evidence level: moderate                           14.  Preventing intraoperative hypothermia
  Grade of recommendation:  strong
                                                        Normothermia ([36°) during surgery is recommended
  There were no studies assessing the safety of robotic to reduce postoperative cardiac and non-cardiac compli-
liver surgery in patients within an ERAS protocol. Robotic cations [81–86]. However, no study speciﬁc to liver sur-
liver resection seems to be feasible by hepato-biliary sur- gery investigating this point could be found. According to
geons with advanced training, especially for lesions located one RCT and one recent meta-analysis, even mild
in the postero-superior segments [72, 73]. However,  hypothermia increased signiﬁcantly the risk of blood loss
according to a recent large series comparing robotic versus and transfusion [82, 86]. One meta-analysis suggested that
laparoscopic hepatectomy, signiﬁcant beneﬁts were not circulating water garments offer better temperature control
demonstrated yet [74].                               than forced air warming systems [87].

                                                                                               123


2434                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

  Recommendation:     Perioperative normothermia     during surgery [96]. In addition, there is a rapid change in
  should be maintained during liver resection.       glucose concentration during hepatectomy with Pringle
  Evidence level: moderate                           maneuver, reﬂecting glycogen breakdown within hepato-
  Grade of recommendation:  strong                   cytes because of hypoxia [97]. According to one RCT
                                                     (n = 88), patients who received insulin therapy using a
                                                     closed-loop glycemic control system (i.e., an artiﬁcial
                                                     pancreas) during hepatectomy had reduced total hospital
15.  Postoperative nutrition and early oral intake
                                                     costs and SSI compared to the commonly used sliding-
  Lassen et al. [88] conducted a multicenter randomized scale method [98]. There is evidence that preoperative oral
trial with 427 digestive surgery patients, who received supplementation with carbohydrate and branched-chain
either normal food from postoperative day 1 or a conser- amino acid-enriched nutrient decreased insulin resistance
vative regimen with nil by mouth and enteral tube feeding. in patients undergoing hepatectomy [99]. A raised blood
There was no difference in complications, reoperations or lactate after liver surgery, which correlates with postoper-
mortality, but resumption of bowel function was faster in ative morbidity [100], can be related to insulin resistance or
the ‘‘early food’’ group. Sixty-six patients in this study had to a mix between insulin resistance and ischemia–reper-
either liver resection or hepatico-jejunostomy, conﬁrming fusion injury. Therefore, insulin therapy should be initiated
safety and beneﬁts of early oral intake. Hendry et al. [89] early during liver surgery to maintain normoglycemia
demonstrated the beneﬁts of the routine use of oral laxa- (80–120 mg/dL). Programmed infusion of insulin admin-
tives combined with oral nutritional supplements in liver istered as determined by the control algorithm of a closed-
surgery patients within enhanced recovery pathway. Post- loop artiﬁcial endocrine system seems to be superior than
operative supplemental nutrition is only indicated in mal- manual injection of insulin according to the commonly
nourished patients or in prolonged postoperative fasting used sliding-scale method [98].
([5 days) such  as when  severe complications arise
                                                        Recommendation:  Insulin therapy to maintain nor-
[25–27]. A  systematic review conﬁrmed that enteral
                                                        moglycemia is recommended.
nutrition should be preferred over parenteral nutrition after
                                                        Evidence level: moderate
liver resections for better immune function and lower rates
                                                        Grade of recommendation: strong
of infectious complications [90].
  Recommendation:   Most patients can eat normal
  food at day one after liver surgery. Postoperative 17.  Prevention of delayed gastric emptying
  enteral or parenteral feeding should be reserved for
                                                        Left-sided liver resection may be associated with a
  malnourished patients or those with prolonged fasting
                                                     higher risk of DGE due to disruption of normal gastroin-
  due to complications (e.g., ileus [5 days, delayed
                                                     testinal movement at the point of contact between the
  gastric emptying).
                                                     stomach and the cut liver surface. According to 2 RCTs,
  Evidence level: Early oral intake: moderate; Oral
                                                     the use of omentum ﬂap to cover the liver cut surface after
  nutritional supplements: moderate; No routine post-
                                                     left-sided hepatectomy reduced the incidence of DGE
  operative artiﬁcial nutrition: high.
                                                     [101, 102].
  Grade   of recommendation:   Early oral intake:
  strong; Oral nutritional supplements: weak; No rou-   Recommendation: An omentum ﬂap to cover the cut
  tine postoperative artiﬁcial nutrition: strong.       surface of the liver reduces the risk of DGE after left-
                                                        sided hepatectomy.
                                                        Evidence level: high
16.  Postoperative glycaemic control                    Grade of recommendation: strong
  Perioperative hyperglycemia is frequently observed
after major surgery [91, 92]. These changes result from a
                                                     18.  Stimulation of bowel movement
transient insulin resistance with a compromised peripheral
insulin-dependent glucose uptake [93]. Hyperglycemia    According to 2 recent meta-analyses, the use of ERAS
induced by surgical stress results in deregulation of liver protocol signiﬁcantly shortened the time to ﬁrst ﬂatus,
metabolism and immune function, impairing postoperative hence reducing the postoperative ileus period [12, 103]. In
recovery. In colorectal and pancreatic surgery, early post- the study by Hendry et al. [89], the routine use of post-
operative hyperglycemia was associated with adverse out- operative laxatives resulted in an earlier ﬁrst passage of
comes [19, 94, 95]. Postoperative insulin sensitivity is stool, but the overall rate of recovery was unaltered in liver
signiﬁcantly reduced in patients not treated with insulin surgery patients. The use of chewing gum (CG) after
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                   2435

surgery has been addressed in a large Cochrane review [113]. There was no difference in hospital length of stay,
[104]. This meta-analysis showed no clear beneﬁt of CG in and the overall complication rate was higher in the
ERAS patients and included few patients with liver sur- epidural group.
gery. The use of laparoscopic surgery and aiming for a
                                                        Recommendations: Routine TEA cannot be recom-
neutral ﬂuid balance by avoiding salt and ﬂuid overload in
                                                        mended in open liver surgery for ERAS patients.
the postoperative period have been shown to reduce the
                                                        Wound infusion catheter or intrathecal opiates can be
risk of postoperative ileus [12, 63].
                                                        good alternatives when combined with multimodal
  Recommendation:   Stimulation of bowel movement       analgesia.
  after liver surgery is not indicated.                 Evidence level: moderate
  Evidence level: high                                  Grade of recommendation: strong
  Grade of recommendation:  strong

                                                     21.  Postoperative nausea and vomiting
19.  Early mobilization
                                                        Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is common
  Bed rest is associated with multiple documented dele- after major surgery, but the multimodal approach within
terious effects [105, 106]. Bed rest favors diffuse muscle ERAS pathway enables most patients after liver resection
atrophy, thromboembolic disease and insulin resistance to eat on postoperative day 1 [13]. Risk factors are assessed
[107]. There was no evidence that early mobilization is preoperatively and include: previous PONV, female gen-
deleterious after liver surgery. Further studies are needed to der, younger age, non-smoker and use of volatile anesthetic
determine the frequency and the number of hours required agents and opioids [114]. 5HT3 antagonists remain the
to improve patients outcome.                         ﬁrst-line therapy due to their good side effect proﬁle. Low-
                                                     dose dexamethasone improves liver regeneration (with no
  Recommendation:   Early mobilization after hepate-
                                                     additional beneﬁt at higher doses) [115]. As dexametha-
  ctomy should be encouraged from the morning after
                                                     sone can worsen glycemic control, it should be used with
  the operation until hospital discharge.
                                                     caution in diabetics. Other secondary drugs are antihis-
  Evidence level: low
                                                     tamines, butyrophenones  and  phenothiazines [115].
  Grade of recommendation:  weak
                                                     According to the recommendations from the international
                                                     consensus group on PONV, 2 antiemetic drugs are advo-
                                                     cated to reduce postoperative PONV [116].
20.  Analgesia
                                                        Recommendations:   A  multimodal approach  to
  In one RCT using thoracic epidural analgesia (TEA), a
                                                        PONV should be used. Patients should receive PONV
short length of stays of 4 days after major liver resection
                                                        prophylaxis with 2 antiemetic drugs.
was achieved with low complication rate [13]. A concern
                                                        Evidence level: moderate
using TEA  is the possible prolongation of prothrombin
                                                        Recommendation Grade:  strong
time  after hepatectomy, which may   delay epidural
catheter removal and increase administration of corrective
blood products [108]. A recent RCT showed that epidural
                                                     22.  Fluid management
analgesia in open liver resection might be a risk factor for
postoperative kidney failure due to hypotension [109].  The reduction in hepatic venous congestion by careful
Several studies have suggested that intrathecal opiates are control of central venous pressure (CVP) during hepatic
a suitable alternative to epidural analgesia and traditional resection is associated with a reduction in intraoperative
morphine PCA [110, 111]. One recent RCT compared the blood loss [117–119]. A Cochrane review evidenced that a
role of local anesthetic wound infusion catheter plus lower CVP reduced blood loss, but there was no difference
patient-controlled opiate analgesia to standard epidural in red cell transfusion requirements, intraoperative mor-
analgesia after open liver resection within an ERAS  bidity or long-term survival beneﬁts [120]. In a recent
protocol [112]. Wound infusion reduced the length of meta-analysis by Hughes et al., the maintenance of a low
time required to fulﬁll criteria for hospital discharge; CVP is associated with reduced blood loss and blood
however, epidural analgesia conferred better analgesia transfusion rates [121]. The goals of intraoperative ﬂuid
control. A meta-analysis of 4 studies (n = 705) with open management are to maintain central euvolemia and to
liver resections has shown lower pain scores on day 1 avoid excess salt and water. To achieve this, patients
postoperatively with epidural, but similar outcome com- undergoing surgery within an ERAS protocol should have
pared to local anesthetic inﬁltration via wound catheters an individualized ﬂuid management plan. As part of this
                                                                                               123


2436                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

plan, excess crystalloid and blood loss should be avoided in quality and level of evidence of the studies remain low.
all patients. Although the measure of stroke volume vari- The highest level of evidence (level 1 or 2) was available
ation (SVV) has been proposed as appropriate replacement for only 5 items. Though the value of enhanced recovery
for CVP monitoring [122], it is more likely that a syner- pathways has now been demonstrated in colorectal surgery,
gistic combination of CVP monitoring and SVV methods with a signiﬁcant reduction in morbidity, cost and hospital
will become the standard form of hemodynamic monitor- stay, there is a need to perform high-quality studies to
ing in liver surgery.                                conﬁrm the beneﬁt of ERAS pathways in liver surgery. In
  One recent study has demonstrated that goal-directed conclusion, the proposed ERAS pathway for liver surgery
ﬂuid therapy at the end of hepatic resection and during the is based on the best available evidence, but it needs to be
ﬁrst 6 h enabled a faster restoration of circulating volume further investigated. In addition, a very important aspect of
with reduction in complications [13]. The use of balanced ERAS pathways is the assessment of adherence to the
crystalloid solution rather than 0.9 % normal saline to protocol (compliance). Compliance with the new proposed
maintain intravascular volume is recommended to avoid liver ERAS protocol should be documented as part of
hyperchloremic acidosis and other causes of postoperative further trial to allow benchmarking.
morbidity [123, 124]. The role of colloids remains con-
troversial, and the use of hetastarches increases the risks of Authors’ contributions EM performed the systematic review and
renal dysfunction when SIRS response and sepsis are pre- wrote and edited the manuscript; MH performed the systematic review,
                                                     wrote one part of the manuscript and edited the manuscript; MS per-
sent, and should be avoided in liver resection [125]. formed the systematic review, wrote one part of the manuscript and
                                                     edited the manuscript; CS performed the systematic review and wrote
  Recommendations:   The maintenance of low CVP      one part of the manuscript; JP performed the systematic review and
  (below  5 cmH2O) with  close monitoring during     wrote one part of the manuscript; CHCD revised critically and edited
  hepatic surgery is advocated. Balanced crystalloid the manuscript; OJG revised critically and edited the manuscript; OF
  should be preferred over 0.9 % saline or colloids to revised critically and edited the manuscript; NK revised critically and
                                                     edited the manuscript; JNV revised critically and edited the manuscript;
  maintain intravascular volume and avoid hyper-     PAC revised critically and edited the manuscript; ND supervised the
  chloremic acidosis or renal dysfunction, respectively. strategy and revised critically and edited the manuscript.
  Evidence level: moderate
  Recommendation Grade:   strong                     Compliance with ethical standards
                                                     Conﬂict of interest EM, MH, CS, JP, CHCD, OF, JNV, PAC
                                                     declares that they have no conﬂicts of interest. MS Grants, consulting
23.  Audit                                           and travel: Merck, Deltex, Baxter, LIDCO, not related to present
                                                     work. OJG Educational grant: Ethicon (Johnson and Johnson), not
  The effectiveness of audit in improving health care has related to present work. NK Research grants from Dainihon Sumit-
been demonstrated in a recent Cochrane systematic review omo, Bristol Mayers, and Taiho Yakuhin, not related to present work.
[126]. Feedback was more efﬁcient when baseline perfor- ND Grants and consulting: Nestle´ Scientiﬁc, MSD, Covidien, Johnson
                                                     and Johnson, not related to present work.
mance was low, when the source was a supervisor or a
colleague, and when it was provided more than once,
delivered in verbal and written formats, and when it
included both explicit targets and action plan. Since strict References
adherence to the protocol is paramount for the success of
ERAS implementation, auditing compliance has become    1. Cerantola Y, Valerio M, Persson B et al (2013) Guidelines for
                                                         perioperative care after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer:
per se a key element [34].                               Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS((R))) society rec-
  Recommendation:   Systematic audit improves com-       ommendations. Clin Nutr 32:879–887
                                                       2. Varadhan KK, Neal KR, Dejong CH et al (2010) The enhanced
  pliance and clinical outcome in healthcare practice    recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathway for patients undergoing
  Evidence level: moderate                               major elective open colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of ran-
  Grade of recommendation:  strong                       domized controlled trials. Clin Nutr 29:434–440
                                                       3. Ansari D, Gianotti L, Schroder J, Andersson R (2013) Fast-track
                                                         surgery: procedure-speciﬁc aspects and future direction. Lan-
                                                         genbecks Arch Surg 398:29–37
Conclusions                                            4. Muller S, Zalunardo MP, Hubner M et al (2009) A fast-track
                                                         program reduces complications and length of hospital stay after
This systematic review highlights that the current available open colonic surgery. Gastroenterology 136:842–847
                                                       5. Greco M, Capretti G, Beretta L et al (2014) Enhanced recovery
data on enhanced recovery pathways in liver surgery are  program in colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized
scarce and lacks standardization. Although 16 out of the 23 controlled trials. World J Surg 38:1531–1541. doi:10.1007/
standard items of ERAS were studied for liver surgery, the s00268-013-2416-8

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                                 2437

  6. Roulin D, Donadini A, Gander S et al (2013) Cost-effectiveness 28. Schindler K, Pernicka E, Laviano A et al (2010) How nutritional
    of the implementation of an enhanced recovery protocol for   risk is assessed and managed in European hospitals: a survey of
    colorectal surgery. Br J Surg 100:1108–1114                  21,007 patients ﬁndings from the 2007–2008 cross-sectional
  7. Dokmak S, Fteriche FS, Borscheid R et al (2013) 2012 Liver  nutritionDay survey. Clin Nutr 29:552–559
    resections in the 21st century: we are far from zero mortality. 29. Braga M, Ljungqvist O, Soeters P et al (2009) ESPEN Guide-
    HPB (Oxford) 15:908–915                                      lines on parenteral nutrition: surgery. Clin Nutr 28:378–386
  8. Dondero F, Taille C, Mal H et al (2006) Respiratory compli- 30. Mikagi K, Kawahara R, Kinoshita H, Aoyagi S (2011) Effect of
    cations: a major concern after right hepatectomy in living liver preoperative immunonutrition in patients undergoing hepatec-
    donors. Transplantation 81:181–186                           tomy; a randomized controlled trial. Kurume Med J 58:1–8
  9. Melloul E, Dondero F, Vilgrain V et al (2012) Pulmonary  31. Ciacio O, Voron T, Pittau G et al (2014) Interest of preoperative
    embolism after elective liver resection: a prospective analysis of immunonutrition in liver resection for cancer: study protocol of
    risk factors. J Hepatol 57:1268–1275                         the PROPILS trial, a multicenter randomized controlled phase
 10. Farges O, Goutte N, Bendersky N et al (2012) Incidence and  IV trial. BMC Cancer 14:980
    risks of liver resection: an all-inclusive French nationwide study. 32. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W et al (2013) Guidelines
    Ann Surg 256:697–704 (discussion 704–695)                    for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: Enhanced
 11. Verhoef C, Singla N, Moneta G et al (2015) Fibrocaps for    Recovery After Surgery (ERAS((R))) Society recommendations.
    surgical hemostasis: two randomized, controlled phase II trials. World J Surg 37:259–284. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2012.08.013
    J Surg Res 194:679–687                                    33. Bilku DK, Dennison AR, Hall TC et al (2014) Role of preop-
 12. Hughes MJ, McNally S, Wigmore SJ (2014) Enhanced recovery   erative carbohydrate loading: a systematic review. Ann R Coll
    following liver surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Engl 96:15–22
    HPB (Oxford) 16:699–706                                   34. Gustafsson UO, Hausel J, Thorell A et al (2011) Adherence to
 13. Jones C, Kelliher L, Dickinson M et al (2013) Randomized    the enhanced recovery after surgery protocol and outcomes after
    clinical trial on enhanced recovery versus standard care fol- colorectal cancer surgery. Arch Surg 146:571–577
    lowing open liver resection. Br J Surg 100:1015–1024      35. Nygren J, Thacker J, Carli F et al (2013) Guidelines for peri-
 14. Hutton B, Salanti G, Caldwell DM et al (2015) The PRISMA    operative care in elective rectal/pelvic surgery: Enhanced
    extension statement for reporting of systematic reviews incor- Recovery After Surgery (ERAS((R))) Society recommendations.
    porating network meta-analyses of health care interventions: World J Surg 37:285–305. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2012.08.012
    checklist and explanations. Ann Intern Med 162:777–784    36. Beyer TA, Werner S (2008) The cytoprotective Nrf2 transcrip-
 15. Kehlet H (1997) Multimodal approach to control postoperative tion factor controls insulin receptor signaling in the regenerating
    pathophysiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth 78:606–617  liver. Cell Cycle 7:874–878
 16. Strasberg SM (2005) Nomenclature of hepatic anatomy and  37. Holte K, Nielsen KG, Madsen JL, Kehlet H (2004) Physiologic
    resections: a review of the Brisbane 2000 system. J Hepatobil- effects of bowel preparation. Dis Colon Rectum 47:1397–1402
    iary Pancreat Surg 12:351–355                             38. Walker KJ, Smith AF (2009) Premedication for anxiety in adult
 17. Jadad AR, Moore RA, Carroll D et al (1996) Assessing the    day surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (4):CD002192. doi:
    quality of reports of randomized clinical trials: is blinding 10.1002/14651858.CD002192.pub2
    necessary? Control Clin Trials 17:1–12                    39. Reddy SK, Turley RS, Barbas AS et al (2011) Post-operative
 18. Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, Group C (2010) CONSORT       pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis after major hepatectomy:
    2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group does peripheral venous thromboembolism prevention outweigh
    randomized trials. Ann Intern Med 152:726–732                bleeding risks? J Gastrointest Surg 15:1602–1610
 19. Lassen K, Coolsen MM, Slim K et al (2012) Guidelines for 40. Rasmussen MS, Jorgensen LN, Wille-Jorgensen P (2009) Pro-
    perioperative care for pancreaticoduodenectomy: Enhanced     longed thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin
    Recovery After Surgery (ERAS(R)) Society recommendations.    for abdominal or pelvic surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
    Clin Nutr 31:817–830                                         (1):CD004318. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004318.pub2
 20. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R et al (2008) Going from evi- 41. Richardson AJ, Laurence JM, Lam VW (2014) Use of pre-op-
    dence to recommendations. BMJ 336:1049–1051                  erative steroids in liver resection: a systematic review and meta-
 21. Hsu CC, Sandford BA (2007) The Delphi technique: making     analysis. HPB (Oxford) 16:12–19
    sense of consensus. Pract Assess Res Eval 12:1–7          42. Li N, Gu WL, Weng JF et al (2015) Short-term administration of
 22. Pike I, Piedt S, Davison CM et al (2015) Youth injury preven- steroids does not affect postoperative complications following
    tion in Canada: use of the Delphi method to develop recom-   liver resection: evidence from a meta-analysis of randomized
    mendations. BMC Public Health 15:1274                        controlled trials. Hepatol Res 45:201–209
 23. Loblaw DA, Prestrud AA, Somerﬁeld MR et al (2012) American 43. Gurusamy KS, Naik P, Davidson BR (2011) Methods of
    Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guidelines: for- decreasing infection to improve outcomes after liver resections.
    mal systematic review-based consensus methodology. J Clin    Cochrane Database Syst Rev (11):CD006933. doi:10.1002/
    Oncol 30:3136–3140                                           14651858.CD006933.pub2
 24. International patient decision aid standards collaboration. 44. Hirokawa F, Hayashi M, Miyamoto Y et al (2013) Evaluation of
    Background document. http://ipdas.ohri.ca/IPDAS_Background.  postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis after liver resection: a ran-
    pdf. Published February 17, 2005                             domized controlled trial. Am J Surg 206:8–15
 25. Weimann A, Braga M, Harsanyi L et al (2006) ESPEN Guide- 45. Togo S, Tanaka K, Matsuo K et al (2007) Duration of antimi-
    lines on enteral nutrition: surgery including organ transplanta- crobial prophylaxis in patients undergoing hepatectomy: a
    tion. Clin Nutr 25:224–244                                   prospective randomized controlled trial using ﬂomoxef. J An-
 26. Guenter P, Robinson L, DiMaria-Ghalili RA et al (2012)      timicrob Chemother 59:964–970
    Development of Sustain: ASPENs National Patient Registry for 46. Takara D, Sugawara G, Ebata T et al (2011) Preoperative biliary
    Nutrition Care. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 36:399–406      MRSA infection in patients undergoing hepatobiliary resection
 27. Weimann A, Breitenstein S, Breuer JP et al (2014) [Clinical with cholangiojejunostomy: incidence, antibiotic treatment, and
    nutrition in surgery. Guidelines of the German Society for   surgical outcome. World J Surg 35:850–857. doi:10.1007/
    Nutritional Medicine]. Chirurg 85:320–326                    s00268-011-0990-1

                                                                                                            123


2438                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

 47. Bratzler DW, Houck PM, Surgical Infection Prevention Guide- 65. Mizuguchi T, Kawamoto M, Meguro M et al (2011) Laparo-
    lines, Writers W et al (2004) Antimicrobial prophylaxis for  scopic hepatectomy: a systematic review, meta-analysis, and
    surgery: an advisory statement from the National Surgical    power analysis. Surg Today 41:39–47
    Infection Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis 38:1706–1715 66. Croome KP, Yamashita MH (2010) Laparoscopic vs open
 48. Hsieh CS, Cheng HC, Lin JS et al (2014) Effect of 4 %       hepatic resection for benign and malignant tumors: an updated
    chlorhexidine gluconate predisinfection skin scrub prior to  meta-analysis. Arch Surg 145:1109–1118
    hepatectomy: a double-blinded, randomized control study. Int 67. Simillis C, Constantinides VA, Tekkis PP et al (2007) Laparo-
    Surg 99:787–794                                              scopic versus open hepatic resections for benign and malignant
 49. Darouiche RO, Wall MJ Jr, Itani KM et al (2010) Chlorhexi-  neoplasms—a meta-analysis. Surgery 141:203–211
    dine–alcohol versus povidone–iodine for surgical-site antisepsis. 68. Bhojani FD, Fox A, Pitzul K et al (2012) Clinical and economic
    N Engl J Med 362:18–26                                       comparison of laparoscopic to open liver resections using a 2-to-
 50. D’Angelica M, Maddineni S, Fong Y et al (2006) Optimal      1 matched pair analysis: an institutional experience. J Am Coll
    abdominal incision for partial hepatectomy: increased late   Surg 214:184–195
    complications with Mercedes-type incisions compared to    69. Montalti R, Berardi G, Laurent S et al (2014) Laparoscopic liver
    extended right subcostal incisions. World J Surg 30:410–418. resection compared to open approach in patients with colorectal
    doi:10.1007/s00268-005-0183-x                                liver metastases improves further resectability: Oncological
 51. Togo S, Nagano Y, Masumoto C et al (2008) Outcome of and    outcomes of a case–control matched-pairs analysis. Eur J Surg
    risk factors for incisional hernia after partial hepatectomy. Oncol 40:536–544
    J Gastrointest Surg 12:1115–1120                          70. Dokmak S, Raut V, Aussilhou B et al (2014) Laparoscopic left
 52. Chang SB, Palavecino M, Wray CJ et al (2010) Modiﬁed        lateral resection is the gold standard for benign liver lesions: a
    Makuuchi incision for foregut procedures. Arch Surg 145:     case–control study. HPB (Oxford) 16:183–187
    281–284                                                   71. Scatton O, Katsanos G, Boillot O et al (2015) Pure laparoscopic
 53. Wakabayashi G, Cherqui D, Geller DA et al (2015) Recom-     left lateral sectionectomy in living donors: from innovation to
    mendations for laparoscopic liver resection: a report from the development in France. Ann Surg 261:506–512
    second international consensus conference held in Morioka. Ann 72. Troisi RI, Patriti A, Montalti R, Casciola L (2013) Robot
    Surg 261:619–629                                             assistance in liver surgery: a real advantage over a fully
 54. Stoot JH, van Dam RM, Busch OR et al (2009) The effect of a laparoscopic approach? Results of a comparative bi-institutional
    multimodal fast-track programme on outcomes in laparoscopic  analysis. Int J Med Robot 9:160–166
    liver surgery: a multicentre pilot study. HPB (Oxford) 11:140–144 73. Ho CM, Wakabayashi G, Nitta H et al (2013) Systematic review
 55. van Dam RM, Wong-Lun-Hing EM, van Breukelen GJ et al        of robotic liver resection. Surg Endosc 27:732–739
    (2012) Open versus laparoscopic left lateral hepatic sectionec- 74. Tsung A, Geller DA, Sukato DC et al (2014) Robotic versus
    tomy  within an enhanced recovery ERAS(R) programme          laparoscopic hepatectomy: a matched comparison. Ann Surg
    (ORANGE II-trial): study protocol for a randomised controlled 259:549–555
    trial. Trials 13:54                                       75. Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B (2007) Prophylactic nasogastric
 56. Lin NC, Nitta H, Wakabayashi G (2013) Laparoscopic major    decompression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database
    hepatectomy: a systematic literature review and comparison of 3 Syst Rev (3):CD004929. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004929.
    techniques. Ann Surg 257:205–213                             pub3
 57. Rao AM, Ahmed I (2013) Laparoscopic versus open liver    76. Pessaux P, Regimbeau JM, Dondero F et al (2007) Randomized
    resection for benign and malignant hepatic lesions in adults. clinical trial evaluating the need for routine nasogastric
    Cochrane  Database Syst  Rev  (5):CD1016. doi:10.1002/       decompression after elective hepatic resection. Br J Surg
    14651858.CD010162.pub2                                       94:297–303
 58. Parks KR, Kuo YH, Davis JM et al (2014) Laparoscopic versus 77. Petrowsky H, Demartines N, Rousson V, Clavien PA (2004)
    open liver resection: a meta-analysis of long-term outcome.  Evidence-based value of prophylactic drainage in gastrointesti-
    HPB (Oxford) 16:109–118                                      nal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Ann Surg
 59. Yin Z, Fan X, Ye H et al (2013) Short- and long-term outcomes 240:1074–1084 (discussion 1084–1075)
    after laparoscopic and open hepatectomy for hepatocellular 78. Belghiti J, Kabbej M, Sauvanet A et al (1993) Drainage after
    carcinoma: a global systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann elective hepatic resection. A randomized trial. Ann Surg
    Surg Oncol 20:1203–1215                                      218:748–753
 60. Xiong JJ, Altaf K, Javed MA et al (2012) Meta-analysis of 79. Fong Y, Brennan MF, Brown K et al (1996) Drainage is
    laparoscopic vs open liver resection for hepatocellular carci- unnecessary after elective liver resection. Am J Surg 171:
    noma. World J Gastroenterol 18:6657–6668                     158–162
 61. Nguyen KT, Marsh JW, Tsung A  et al (2011) Comparative   80. Kyoden Y, Imamura H, Sano K et al (2010) Value of prophy-
    beneﬁts of laparoscopic vs open hepatic resection: a critical lactic abdominal drainage in 1269 consecutive cases of elective
    appraisal. Arch Surg 146:348–356                             liver resection. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 17:186–192
 62. Fancellu A, Rosman AS, Sanna V et al (2011) Meta-analysis of 81. Frank SM, Fleisher LA, Breslow MJ et al (1997) Perioperative
    trials comparing minimally-invasive and open liver resections maintenance of normothermia reduces the incidence of morbid
    for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Surg Res 171:e33–e45         cardiac events. A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 277:1127–
 63. Mirnezami R, Mirnezami AH, Chandrakumaran K et al (2011)    1134
    Short- and long-term outcomes after laparoscopic and open 82. Rajagopalan S, Mascha E, Na J, Sessler DI (2008) The effects of
    hepatic resection: systematic review and meta-analysis. HPB  mild perioperative hypothermia on blood loss and transfusion
    (Oxford) 13:295–308                                          requirement. Anesthesiology 108:71–77
 64. Zhou YM, Shao WY, Zhao YF et al (2011) Meta-analysis of  83. Scott EM, Buckland R (2006) A systematic review of intraop-
    laparoscopic versus open resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. erative warming to prevent postoperative complications. AORN
    Dig Dis Sci 56:1937–1943                                     J 83(1090–1104):1107–1113

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440                                                                                 2439

 84. Lehtinen SJ, Onicescu G, Kuhn KM et al (2010) Normothermia 102. Yoshida H, Mamada Y, Taniai N et al (2005) Fixation of the
    to prevent surgical site infections after gastrointestinal surgery: greater omentum for prevention of delayed gastric emptying
    holy grail or false idol? Ann Surg 252:696–704               after left-sided hepatectomy: a randomized controlled trial.
 85. Melton GB, Vogel JD, Swenson BR et al (2013) Continuous     Hepatogastroenterology 52:1334–1337
    intraoperative temperature measurement and surgical site 103. Ni CY, Yang Y, Chang YQ  et al (2013) Fast-track surgery
    infection risk: analysis of anesthesia information system data in improves postoperative recovery in patients undergoing partial
    1008 colorectal procedures. Ann Surg 258:606–612 (discussion hepatectomy for primary liver cancer: a prospective randomized
    612–603)                                                     controlled trial. Eur J Surg Oncol 39:542–547
 86. Wong PF, Kumar S, Bohra A et al (2007) Randomized clinical 104. Short V, Herbert G, Perry R et al (2015) Chewing gum for
    trial of perioperative systemic warming in major elective    postoperative recovery of gastrointestinal function. Cochrane
    abdominal surgery. Br J Surg 94:421–426                      Database Syst Rev  (2):CD006506. doi:10.1002/14651858.
 87. Galvao CM, Liang Y, Clark AM (2010) Effectiveness of cuta-  CD006506.pub3
    neous warming systems on temperature control: meta-analysis. 105. Kehlet H, Wilmore DW (2002) Multimodal strategies to
    J Adv Nurs 66:1196–1206                                      improve surgical outcome. Am J Surg 183:630–641
 88. Lassen K, Kjaeve J, Fetveit T et al (2008) Allowing normal food 106. Convertino VA (1997) Cardiovascular consequences of bed rest:
    at will after major upper gastrointestinal surgery does not  effect on maximal oxygen uptake. Med Sci Sports Exerc
    increase morbidity: a randomized multicenter trial. Ann Surg 29:191–196
    247:721–729                                              107. Brower RG (2009) Consequences of bed rest. Crit Care Med
 89. Hendry PO, van Dam RM, Bukkems SF et al (2010) Random-      37:S422–S428
    ized clinical trial of laxatives and oral nutritional supplements 108. Sakowska M, Docherty E, Linscott D, Connor S (2009) A
    within an enhanced recovery after surgery protocol following change in practice from epidural to intrathecal morphine anal-
    liver resection. Br J Surg 97:1198–1206                      gesia for hepato-pancreato-biliary surgery. World J Surg
 90. Richter B, Schmandra TC, Golling M, Bechstein WO (2006)     33:1802–1808. doi:10.1007/s00268-009-0131-2
    Nutritional support after open liver resection: a systematic 109. Kambakamba P, Slankamenac K, Tschuor C et al (2015)
    review. Dig Surg 23:139–145                                  Epidural analgesia and perioperative kidney function after major
 91. Frisch A, Chandra P, Smiley D et al (2010) Prevalence and   liver resection. Br J Surg 102:805–812
    clinical outcome of hyperglycemia in the perioperative period in 110. Roy JD, Massicotte L, Sassine MP et al (2006) A comparison of
    noncardiac surgery. Diabetes Care 33:1783–1788               intrathecal morphine/fentanyl and patient-controlled analgesia
 92. King JT Jr, Goulet JL, Perkal MF, Rosenthal RA (2011) Gly-  with patient-controlled analgesia alone for analgesia after liver
    cemic control and infections in patients with diabetes undergo- resection. Anesth Analg 103:990–994
    ing noncardiac surgery. Ann Surg 253:158–165             111. Kasivisvanathan R, Abbassi-Ghadi N, Prout J et al (2014) A
 93. Lipshutz AK, Gropper MA  (2009) Perioperative glycemic      prospective cohort study of intrathecal versus epidural analgesia
    control: an evidence-based review. Anesthesiology 110:408–421 for patients undergoing hepatic resection. HPB (Oxford)
 94. Eshuis WJ, Hermanides J, van Dalen JW et al (2011) Early    16:768–775
    postoperative hyperglycemia is associated with postoperative 112. Revie EJ, McKeown DW, Wilson JA et al (2012) Randomized
    complications after pancreatoduodenectomy. Ann Surg 253:739– clinical trial of local inﬁltration plus patient-controlled opiate
    744                                                          analgesia vs. epidural analgesia following liver resection sur-
 95. Jackson RS, Amdur RL, White JC, Macsata RA    (2012)        gery. HPB (Oxford) 14:611–618
    Hyperglycemia is associated with increased risk of morbidity 113. Bell R, Pandanaboyana S, Prasad KR (2015) Epidural versus
    and mortality after colectomy for cancer. J Am Coll Surg     local anaesthetic inﬁltration via wound catheters in open liver
    214:68–80                                                    resection: a meta-analysis. ANZ J Surg 85:16–21
 96. Blixt C, Ahlstedt C, Ljungqvist O et al (2012) The effect of 114. Apfel CC, Heidrich FM, Jukar-Rao S et al (2012) Evidence-
    perioperative glucose control on postoperative insulin resis- based analysis of risk factors for postoperative nausea and
    tance. Clin Nutr 31:676–681                                  vomiting. Br J Anaesth 109:742–753
 97. Maeda H, Okabayashi T, Nishimori I et al (2010) Hyper-  115. Carlisle JB, Stevenson CA (2006) Drugs for preventing post-
    glycemia during hepatic resection: continuous monitoring of  operative nausea and vomiting. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
    blood glucose concentration. Am J Surg 199:8–13              (3):CD004125. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004125.pub2
 98. Okabayashi T, Nishimori I, Maeda H et al (2009) Effect of 116. Gan TJ, Diemunsch P, Habib AS (2014) Consensus guidelines
    intensive insulin therapy using a closed-loop glycemic control for the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting.
    system in hepatic resection patients: a prospective randomized Anesth Analg 118(1):85–113
    clinical trial. Diabetes Care 32:1425–1427               117. Chen H, Merchant NB, Didolkar MS (2000) Hepatic resection
 99. Okabayashi T, Nishimori I, Yamashita K et al (2010) Preoper- using intermittent vascular inﬂow occlusion and low central
    ative oral supplementation with carbohydrate and branched-   venous pressure anesthesia improves morbidity and mortality.
    chain amino acid-enriched nutrient improves insulin resistance J Gastrointest Surg 4:162–167
    in patients undergoing a hepatectomy: a randomized clinical 118. Jones RM, Moulton CE, Hardy KJ (1998) Central venous
    trial using an artiﬁcial pancreas. Amino Acids 38:901–907    pressure and its effect on blood loss during liver resection. Br J
100. Vibert E, Boleslawski E, Cosse C et al (2015) Arterial lactate Surg 85:1058–1060
    concentration at the end of an elective hepatectomy is an early 119. Li Z, Sun YM, Wu FX et al (2014) Controlled low central
    predictor of the postoperative course and a potential surrogate of venous pressure reduces blood loss and transfusion requirements
    intraoperative events. Ann Surg 262:787–793                  in hepatectomy. World J Gastroenterol 20:303–309
101. Igami T, Nishio H, Ebata T et al (2011) Using the greater 120. Gurusamy KS, Li J, Sharma D, Davidson BR (2009) Car-
    omental ﬂap to cover the cut surface of the liver for prevention diopulmonary interventions to decrease blood loss and blood
    of delayed gastric emptying after left-sided hepatobiliary   transfusion requirements for liver resection. Cochrane Database
    resection: a prospective randomized controlled trial. J Hepato- Syst Rev (5):CD007338. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007338.
    biliary Pancreat Sci 18:176–183                              pub3

                                                                                                            123


2440                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2425–2440

121. Hughes MJ, Ventham NT, Harrison EM, Wigmore SJ (2015)   124. Shaw AD, Bagshaw SM, Goldstein SL et al (2012) Major
    Central venous pressure and liver resection: a systematic review complications, mortality, and resource utilization after open
    and meta-analysis. HPB (Oxford) 17:863–871                   abdominal surgery: 0.9 % saline compared to Plasma-Lyte. Ann
122. Dunki-Jacobs EM, Philips P, Scoggins CR et al (2014) Stroke Surg 255:821–829
    volume variation in hepatic resection: a replacement for stan- 125. Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB et al (2012) Hydroxyethyl
    dard central venous pressure monitoring. Ann Surg Oncol      starch 130/0.42 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl
    21:473–478                                                   J Med 367:124–134
123. McCluskey SA, Karkouti K, Wijeysundera D et al (2013)   126. Ivers N, Jamtvedt G, Flottorp S et al (2012) Audit and feedback:
    Hyperchloremia after noncardiac surgery is independently     effects on professional practice and healthcare outcomes.
    associated with increased morbidity and mortality: a propensity- Cochrane Database Syst Rev (6):CD000259. doi:10.1002/
    matched cohort study. Anesth Analg 117:412–421               14651858.CD000259.pub3


123



