World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-021-05994-9

 ORIGINAL SCIENTIFIC REPORT

Guidelines for Perioperative Care for Emergency Laparotomy
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society
Recommendations: Part 1—Preoperative: Diagnosis, Rapid
Assessment and Optimization

              1,2                 3                   4                   5,6                 7
Carol J. Peden    • Geeta Aggarwal   • Robert J. Aitken  • Iain D. Anderson  • Nicolai Bang Foss •
            8                   9                    10                 11                   12,13
Zara Cooper    • Jugdeep K. Dhesi • W. Brenton French  • Michael C. Grant • Folke Hammarqvist     •
             14                    15                 16               17               18
Sarah P. Hare  • Joaquim M. Havens   • Daniel N. Holena • Martin Hu¨bner • Jeniffer S. Kim •
               19                 20                21,22                23                     24,25
Nicholas P. Lees   • Olle Ljungqvist • Dileep N. Lobo     • Shahin Mohseni    • Carlos A. Ordon˜ez    •
           26                  27                  28                  29,30                   31
Nial Quiney  • Richard D. Urman     • Elizabeth Wick • Christopher L. Wu    • Tonia Young-Fadok  •
Michael Scott32

Accepted: 30 January 2021 / Published online: 6 March 2021
Ó The Author(s) 2021


   Abstract
   Background Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocols reduce length of stay, complications and costs for
   a large number of elective surgical procedures. A similar, structured approach appears to improve outcomes,
   including mortality, for patients undergoing high-risk emergency general surgery, and speciﬁcally emergency
   laparotomy. These are the ﬁrst consensus guidelines for optimal care of these patients using an ERAS approach.
   Methods Experts in aspects of management of the high-risk and emergency general surgical patient were invited to
   contribute by the International ERASÒ Society. Pubmed, Cochrane, Embase, and MEDLINE database searches on
   English language publications were performed for ERAS elements and relevant speciﬁc topics. Studies on each item
   were selected with particular attention to randomized controlled trials, systematic reviews, meta-analyses and large
   cohort studies, and reviewed and graded using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and
   Evaluation (GRADE) system. Recommendations were made on the best level of evidence, or extrapolation from
   studies on non-emergency patients when appropriate. The Delphi method was used to validate ﬁnal recommenda-
   tions. The guideline has been divided into two parts: Part 1—Preoperative Care and Part 2—Intraoperative and
   Postoperative management. This paper provides guidelines for Part 1.
   Results Twelve components of preoperative care were considered. Consensus was reached after three rounds.
   Conclusions These guidelines are based on the best available evidence for an ERAS approach to patients undergoing
   emergency laparotomy. Initial management is particularly important for patients with sepsis and physiological
   derangement. These guidelines should be used to improve outcomes for these high-risk patients.


&  Carol J. Peden                                       Zara Cooper
   carol.peden@med.usc.edu                              zcooper@bwh.harvard.edu
   Geeta Aggarwal                                       Jugdeep K. Dhesi
   geetaaggarwal@nhs.net                                Jugdeep.Dhesi@gstt.nhs.uk
   Robert J. Aitken                                     W. Brenton French
   rjaitken@me.com                                      william.french@vcuhealth.org
   Iain D. Anderson                                     Michael C. Grant
   iain.anderson@srft.nhs.uk                            mgrant17@jhmi.edu
   Nicolai Bang Foss                                    Folke Hammarqvist
   nbfoss@gmail.com                                     folke.hammarqvist@ki.se

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1273

Introduction

Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) is a multidis- of patients with advanced cancer who underwent emer-
ciplinary structured approach which provides standardized gency laparotomy for bowel perforation [20], showed a
evidence-based components of care to patients undergoing 30-day mortality of 34%, 52% of survivors were dis-
speciﬁc types of surgery. To date, ERAS has largely been charged to an institution. A number of studies have shown
applied to elective surgery but there is now evidence that wide variation not only in outcomes, but also in the
high-risk surgical patients such as those undergoing delivery of evidence-based care to this high-risk patient
emergency laparotomy, can also beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from group [19, 21–28]. Given the concerning nature of these
an ERAS approach [1–11]. The term ‘‘emergency laparo- outcomes, namely high patient morbidity and mortality, a
tomy’’ encompasses a surgical exploration of the acute number of groups worldwide started using evidence-based
abdomen for a number of underlying pathologies [12–17]. protocolized ERAS-like approaches in the management of
Common causes are intestinal obstruction, perforation and these patients, with signiﬁcant improvements in outcomes
exploratory laparotomy with or without wound debride- [1–4, 6, 8, 29]. The UK established a National Emergency
ment or abscess drainage [13–15, 17]. For these ERASÒ Laparotomy Audit (NELA), to measure process delivery
Society guidelines the term ‘‘emergency’’ is applied to all and outcomes. Since the start of NELA data collection in
patients with a non-elective, potentially life-threatening 2013, outcomes have improved with 30-day mortality
intra-abdominal condition requiring surgery, excluding decreasing from 11.8% to 9.3% and performance on key
trauma laparotomies, vascular conditions, appendectomy, process measures improving [17].
and cholecystectomy.                                    The important difference between patients undergoing
  Until recently patients undergoing emergency general emergency laparotomy and those undergoing elective intra-
surgery including emergency laparotomy have been a rel- abdominal procedures is presentation of the former in a state
atively overlooked group [15]. Just under a decade ago, of physiological derangement [13, 30]. Patients are often
major cohort studies reported 30-day mortality for emer- older [14, 17], have co-morbidities, and 30–50% present
gency laparotomy of between 14 and 18.5% rising to over with systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS),
25% in patients over 80 years of age [14, 18, 19]. A review sepsis or septic shock [13, 14, 17, 30–33]. More emergency
                                                     patients undergo an  open  procedure rather than a

   Sarah P. Hare                                        Christopher L. Wu
   Sarah.hare1@nhs.net                                  eduwuch@hss.edu
   Joaquim M. Havens                                    Tonia Young-Fadok
   jhavens@bwh.harvard.edu                              youngfadok.tonia@mayo.edu
   Daniel N. Holena                                     Michael Scott
   Daniel.Holena@pennmedicine.upenn.edu                 Michael.Scott@Pennmedicine.Upenn.edu

   Martin Hu¨bner                                    1
   martin.hubner@chuv.ch                                Department of Anesthesiology and Gehr Family Center for
                                                        Health Systems Science & Innovation, Keck School of
   Jeniffer S. Kim                                      Medicine, University of Southern California, 2020 Zonal
   Jeniffer.Kim@med.usc.edu                             Avenue IRD 322, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA
   Nicholas P. Lees                                  2  Department of Anesthesiology, University of Pennsylvania,
   nick.lees@srft.nhs.uk                                3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
   Olle Ljungqvist                                   3  Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,
   olle.ljungqvist@oru.se                               Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, Surrey, UK
   Dileep N. Lobo                                    4  Sir Charles Gardiner Hospital, Hospital Avenue, Nedlands,
   Dileep.Lobo@nottingham.ac.uk                         WA 6009, Australia
   Carlos A. Ordon˜ez                                5  Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Stott La,
   ordonezcarlosa@gmail.com                             Salford M6 8HD, UK
   Nial Quiney                                       6  University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
   nialquiney@nhs.net
                                                     7  Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark
   Richard D. Urman
                                                     8
   rurman@bwh.harvard.edu                               Harvard Medical School, Kessler Director, Center for
                                                        Surgery and Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital
   Elizabeth Wick                                       and Division of Trauma, Burns, Surgical Critical Care, and
   Elizabeth.Wick@ucsf.edu                              Emergency Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 1620,
                                                        Tremont Street, Boston, MA 02120, USA

                                                                                               123


1274                                                                         World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

laparoscopic procedure for comparable surgery in the elec- healthcare professionals with diverse expertise in the
tive setting [5]. In spite of recent improvements, emergency management of patients undergoing emergency laparo-
laparotomy remains one of the highest risk surgical proce- tomy. The GDG consisted of surgeons, anesthesiologists,
dures with about one in ten patients deceased 30 days after and geriatricians. A number of authors are accredited in
surgery, rising to one in four over the age of 80 years [17]. intensive care, including the ﬁrst and last authors, or have
Complications are common and mortality increases until at signiﬁcant experience of intensive care management of
least 1 year [34]. Functional outcomes and return to inde- these patients. The group was also selected to ensure
pendence can also be poor in survivors [35].         international representation. A list of topics was generated
  These high-risk patients are likely to beneﬁt from a and groups of physicians with different backgrounds and
structured approach with deﬁned pathways of care and from different countries were assigned to each topic, based
organizational resource allocation to prioritize their man- on their expertise, to perform a literature review of English
agement [26, 36]. As emergency laparotomy comprises a language publications and then to generate recommenda-
diverse group of patients and there are a number of new tions using the GRADE structure [37]. The time period
pathway components to be considered, we have divided searched was from  2005 until mid-2020, with greater
these guidelines into Part One (preoperative care) and Part emphasis on recent publications, randomized controlled
Two (intra- and postoperative care, organizational aspects trials, systematic reviews, meta-analyses and large cohort
of management, and end of life issues). We suggest these studies. Retrospective studies were considered where no
ERASÒ   Society Guidelines should be routinely applied to other higher level of evidence was available, and if there
the care of patients undergoing emergency laparotomy and was particular relevance to emergency laparotomy. The
used to audit processes and outcomes of care.        guideline development and Delphi process [38] used to
                                                     reach consensus on recommendations were based on the
                                                     process published by the ERASÒ Society [39]. Twelve
Materials and methods                                components of preoperative care were considered. Three
                                                     rounds of the Delphi process were performed.
This project was initiated by the ERASÒ Society. Lead
authors (CP and MS) were invited by the ERASÒ Society
to establish a guideline development group (GDG) of

9  Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, School of Population
                                                     17
   Health & Environmental Sciences, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Department of Visceral Surgery, Lausanne University
   NHS Foundation Trust, King’s College London, Division of Hospital CHUV, University of Lausanne (UNIL), Rue du
   Surgery & Interventional Science, University College Bugnon 46, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland
   London, London, UK
                                                     18 Gehr Family Center for Health Systems Science &
10
   Department of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth University Innovation, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
   Health System, 1200 E. Broad Street, Richmond, VA 23298, California, 2020 Zonal Avenue IRD 322, Los Angeles,
   USA                                                  CA 90033, USA
11
   Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, 19 Department of General & Colorectal Surgery, Salford Royal
   Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University  NHS Foundation Trust, Scott La, Salford M6 8HD, UK
   School of Medicine, 1800 Orleans Street, Baltimore,
                                                     20
   MD 21287, USA                                        Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
                                                        School of Health and Medical Sciences, O¨ rebro University,
12
   Department of Emergency and Trauma Surgery, Karolinska O¨ rebro, Sweden
   University Hospital, CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet,
                                                     21
   Stockholm, Sweden                                    Gastrointestinal Surgery, Nottingham Digestive Diseases
                                                        Centre and National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
13
   Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge Ha¨lsova¨gen 3. Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham
   B85, S 141 86, Stockholm, Sweden                     University Hospitals and University of Nottingham, Queen’s
14 Department of Anaesthesia, Perioperative Medicine and Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK
   Critical Care, Medway Maritime Hospital, Windmill Road, 22 MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing
   Gillingham, Kent ME7 5NY, UK                         Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham,
15 Division of Trauma, Burns and Surgical Critical Care, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK
   Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, 23 Division of Trauma and Emergency Surgery, Department of
   MA 02115, USA                                        Surgery, Orebro University Hospital & School of Medical
                                                                ¨                  ¨
16 Department of Surgery and Critical Care Medicine,    Sciences, Orebro University, 701 85 Orebro, Sweden
   University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 24 Division of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Department of
                                                        Surgery, Fundacio´n Valle del Lili, Cra 98 No. 18 – 49,
                                                        760032 Cali, Colombia
123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1275

Deﬁnitions                                           Commentary

In these guidelines, emergency laparotomy is deﬁned in The components of a standard elective colorectal pathway
line with criteria used by large cohort studies [16, 40] and were reviewed in relation to the patient undergoing emer-
deﬁnitions of high-risk emergency general surgical proce- gency laparotomy [44]. However, it is the additional
dures [41], therefore, trauma laparotomies, appendectomy, management of the acute physiological derangement
and cholecystectomy are excluded. The majority of vas- before, during and after surgery that leads to a unique
cular conditions are excluded such as laparotomy for vas- emergency laparotomy pathway.
cular pathology including ruptured aortic aneurysm and
return to theatre with complications following a vascular
procedure. Conditions relating to bowel ischemia such as Results
mesenteric vascular insufﬁciency are included [16, 40].
The deﬁnition of emergency can also vary, from classiﬁ- Evidence and recommendations
cation of the case by the surgeon and anesthesiologist as an
emergency [14, 42] to a deﬁnition used in a major US A summary of the ERAS elements and grading of recom-
epidemiology study of emergency surgery [32] as non- mendations with their respective level of evidence are
elective surgery within 48 h of admission. NELA deﬁnes depicted in Table 1.
emergencies as patients having a non-elective admission
with a potentially life-threatening condition [40], and Preoperative phase
urgency is deﬁned [43] as immediate, urgent (surgery
within hours of the decision to operate) or expedited The preoperative phase of an ERAS protocol for emer-
(surgery within days of the decision to operate where some gency laparotomy aims to rapidly correct alterations in the
conservative management may occur initially). In these patients’ physiologic homeostasis. Management of physi-
guidelines, the term ‘‘emergency’’ is applied to all patients ological derangement should occur alongside investigation
with a non-elective, potentially life-threatening intra-ab- and diagnosis. Surgery is a key component to correction of
dominal condition requiring surgery.                 the underlying pathology and when appropriate should
                                                     occur without delay. The following evidence-based com-
                                                     ponents should be incorporated into a preoperative path-
                                                     way  of care for each  patient undergoing emergency
                                                     laparotomy. Organization of care to ensure these key
                                                     components are delivered reliably, by highly skilled per-
25 Seccio´n de Cirugı´a de Trauma Y Emergencias, Universidad sonnel, to all patients regardless of location and type of
   del Valle – Hospital Universitario del Valle, Cl 5 No. 36-08, presentation is one of the main challenges to improving
   760032 Cali, Colombia
                                                     care for these high-risk patients. [25–28, 33, 36].
26 Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,
   Royal Surrey County Hospital, Egerton Road,
   Guildford, Surrey GU5 7XX, UK                     1. Early identiﬁcation of physiological derangement,
                                                     and intervention
27 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain
   Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital / Harvard
   Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA ERAS protocols are designed to minimize the physiologi-
28                                                   cal impact and stress response of the surgical insult. For
   Department of Surgery, University of California San
   Francisco, 513 Parnassus Ave HSW1601, San Francisco, patients who require emergency laparotomy the insult and
   CA 94143, USA                                     physiological derangement driven by inﬂammation, surgi-
29 Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain cal stress and decompensation, are already occurring prior
   Medicine-Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street, to the surgery. Resuscitation must go hand in hand with
   New York, NY 10021, USA                           diagnostic interventions and preparation for surgery.
30 Department of Anesthesiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, 535 Optimization consists of two parts: (1) patient optimization
   East 70th Street, New York, NY 10021, USA         and (2) system  optimization regarding availability of
31 Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of facilities and efﬁcient care pathways [45]. Physiological
   Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic derangements at presentation include a marked stress
   Arizona, 5777 E. Mayo Blvd, Phoenix, AZ 85054, USA response, gut dysfunction, insulin resistance, ﬂuid shifts,
32 Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, SIRS and sepsis with varying degrees of organ dysfunction
   University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, [12, 30]. Emergency surgical patients may be hypovolemic
   PA 19104, USA
                                                     with a potential critical impact on renal function and
                                                                                               123


1276                                                                                    World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

Table 1 ERAS Emergency laparotomy preoperative phase guideline review by delphi method [38, 39]
ERAS item                      Guideline                                                    Level of  Recommendation
                                                                                            evidence  grade

1. Early identiﬁcation of      Resuscitation and correction of underlying physiological derangement High Strong
  physiological derangement and  should begin immediately and should continue during diagnostic
  intervention                   pathways
                               Rapid assessment of the patient for physiological derangement using a High Strong
                                 validated method such as an early warning scoring system should
                                 occur. Abnormal scores should trigger rapid escalation to senior
                                 personnel in line with pre-established local protocols. While awaiting
                                 surgery patients should have regular re-evaluation with a frequency
                                 dictated by local physiological track and trigger protocols
2. Screen and monitor for      All patients for emergency laparotomy should be assessed with a High   Strong
  sepsis and                     validated sepsis score as early in their presentation as possible. This
  accompanying physiological     should be repeated at appropriate intervals in line with severity of
  derangement                    signs, and sepsis risk stratiﬁcation guidance
                               If SIRs, sepsis or septic shock is diagnosed, treatment should begin High Strong
                                 immediately in line with the Surviving Sepsis recognized management
                                 algorithms including measurement of lactate
                               Prompt antibiotic administration should occur in line with existing High Strong
                                 international guidelines on sepsis management when signs of sepsis are
                                 present, or when the underlying surgical pathology makes the patient at
                                 high risk of infection or sepsis such as patients with peritonitis or
                                 hollow viscus perforation. Speciﬁc antibiotic choice should be guided
                                 by local protocols in line with antimicrobial stewardship. Delay to
                                 antibiotic administration in patients with sepsis increases mortality
                               Monitoring of blood lactate as a marker of risk and in monitoring of High Strong
                                 response to resuscitation should be considered even in the absence of
                                 sepsis
3. Early imaging, surgery, and Delay to surgery increases mortality in patients with sepsis and septic High Strong
  source control of sepsis       shock. All patients with septic shock should receive source control with
                                 surgery or interventional radiology as soon as possible and within 3 h.
                                 For patients with sepsis without septic shock source control should
                                 occur within 6 h
                               Perform a CT scan with IV contrast as soon as possible if indicated. The High Strong
                                 CT scan should be reviewed by a radiologist immediately. Acquiring a
                                 CT scan should not cause a delay to surgery if surgery is very urgent
4. Risk assessment             A risk score using a validated model should be performed on all patients High Strong
                                 prior to surgery and at the end of surgery. The score can be used to
                                 guide pathways of care and facilitate discussion between team
                                 members, and with patients and family on treatment, risks and
                                 limitations
5. Age-related evaluation of frailty, All patients over 65 years of age, and others at high risk, for example, High Strong
  and cognitive assessment       patients with cancer, should be assessed for frailty using a validated
                                 frailty score
                               Perform a validated simple assessment of cognitive function such as the Moderate Strong
                                 Mini-CogÒ in all patients over 65 years of age if time permits. For
                                 patients who are at risk for delirium and postoperative cognitive
                                 dysfunction take steps to keep the patient oriented and avoid drugs
                                 known to cause harm as deﬁned in the Beers’ criteria
                               All patients over 65 should have regular delirium screening pre and High Strong
                                 postoperatively with a validated assessment method
                               Patients over 65 years of age should be assessed by a physician with Low Strong
                                 expertise in care of the older patient (geriatrician) preoperatively and
                                 evidence-based elder-friendly practices used. If preoperative
                                 assessment is not possible refer for postoperative follow-up
ERAS item                      Guideline                                                    Level of  Recommendation
                                                                                            evidence  grade

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                                 1277

Table 1 continued
ERAS item                      Guideline                                                    Level of  Recommendation
                                                                                            evidence  grade

6. Reversal of antithrombotic  Strongly consider reversal of home anticoagulation medications when Moderate Strong
  medications                    major surgical intervention is planned. This decision should be based
                                 on both the patient’s risk of procedure-related bleeding and the risk of
                                 thromboembolism
                               Consider platelet transfusion in patients taking antiplatelet therapy when Low Weak
                                 the planned procedural bleeding risk is high. In patients with a strong
                                 indication for antiplatelet therapy, specialty consultation should be
                                 obtained for perioperative co-management of these medications
7. Assessment of venous        Patients should be risk assessed with a validated tool for VTE risk on High Strong
  thromboembolism risk           admission. If pharmaceutical prophylaxis is not possible mechanical
                                 prophylaxis should be used. Reassessment should occur daily
                                 postoperatively
8. Pre-anesthetic medication – Sedative medication should be avoided preoperatively to avoid the risk of Moderate Strong
  anxiolysis and analgesia       micro-aspiration, hypoventilation and delirium
                               Analgesia should be given to alleviate the patient’s pain and stress High Strong
                               Multi modal opioid-sparing analgesia should be titrated to effect to High Strong
                                 maximize comfort and minimize side-effects
9. Preoperative glucose and    Hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are risk factors for adverse  Moderate  Weak
  electrolyte management         postoperative outcomes. Preoperatively, glucose levels should be
                                 maintained at 144-180 mg/dL (8-10 mmol/L), a variable rate (sliding
                                 scale) insulin infusion should be used judiciously to maintain blood
                                 glucose in this range with appropriate monitoring of point of care blood
                                 glucose in line with local protocols, to avoid hypoglycemia
                               Correction of potassium and magnesium prior to surgery should be done Moderate Weak
                                 using the intravenous route with appropriate monitoring and following
                                 local hospital policy. However, it should not delay the patient being
                                 taken to the operating room
10. Preoperative carbohydrate  Authors could not recommend use of preoperative carbohydrate loading
  loading                        in the emergency laparotomy population
11. Preoperative nasogastric   Preoperative nasogastric tube insertion should be considered on an Moderate Strong
  intubation                     individual basis assessing for the risk of aspiration and gastric
                                 distension depending on the pathology and patient factors
12. Patient and family education Patients and families should have the opportunity to discuss the risk of Low Strong
  and shared decision making     surgery with a senior physician (this could be the surgeon,
                                 anesthesiologist or intensive care physician) prior to surgery.
                                 Counselling should be informed by a validated risk score but with the
                                 clear understanding that scores have limitations when applied to
                                 individual patients. When appropriate, treatment escalation plans and
                                 advance care plans should be discussed and documented
                               Clear, concise, written information or decision aids combined with verbal Low Strong
                                 patient education should be provided to the patient and family before
                                 surgery if possible

circulation. These derangements require early recognition   Preoperative goal-directed ﬂuid therapy was used in two of
and management with a sense of urgency. There is little     the multimodal cohort studies which showed signiﬁcant
evidence supporting delay for optimization prior to surgery reduction in mortality [3, 29]. Another small study used a
in this patient category [1, 3, 17, 29, 46]. Some cohort    goal-directed ﬂuid optimization protocol in the preopera-
studies have used standardized perioperative care protocols tive holding room in patients with perforated peptic ulcer
including screening and management of sepsis in line with   and showed reduced length of stay and mortality compared
the Surviving Sepsis Campaign [46] such as initial circu-   with a usual management control group [47]. Lactate gui-
latory and respiratory stabilization, early goal-directed ﬂuid ded resuscitation of patients with septic shock has been
therapy, thorough   and  invasive  monitoring   of vital    shown to reduce mortality [46] and may be beneﬁcial in
parameters, and minimization of surgical delay. These       patients undergoing emergency laparotomy. The issue is
studies have shown a reduction in mortality [1, 3, 6, 29].  not whether to delay for optimization but rather that staff

                                                                                                            123


1278                                                                         World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

competent in the management of signiﬁcant physiological for those with SIRS, and 6.7 for patients with septic shock
derangement must be involved at the earliest possible [54]. A study of 360,000 general surgical patients from the
stage.                                               NSQIP database found that the presence of any comor-
  The pathophysiological abnormalities vary depending bidity increased the risk of sepsis and septic shock six-fold,
on the patient’s underlying health and co-morbidities, and increased 30-day mortality 22-fold [55]. The three
metabolic and immune status [48], and the underlying major risk factors for sepsis and septic shock were age [
disorder and the duration of injury before presentation 60 years, comorbidity and emergency surgery. The
[27, 30, 36]. Patients who undergo emergency laparotomy authors commented that these patients would beneﬁt from
represent only a fraction of the total volume of emergency mandatory sepsis screening in order not to miss the win-
general surgical cases but constitute the overwhelming dow of early intervention in which the septic source must
majority of cases resulting in mortality and morbidity [32]. be eliminated, and physiologic derangements corrected.
Use of physiological track and trigger systems [49] such as The presence of hypotension secondary to sepsis has a
Early Warning Scores have been found to be highly pre- particularly poor outcome [55–58], with one large study of
dictive for severity of outcome including ICU admission perforated peptic ulcer showing a 6% increased odds of
and mortality in emergency surgical patients [50]. Scoring 90-day mortality on adjusted risk analysis per hour delay to
systems found to be predictive in emergency surgical surgery in patients with preoperative hypotension [57].
patients include the Acute Physiological and Chronic Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion of sepsis
Health Evaluation (APACHE II), Physiological and Oper- when assessing emergency surgery patients.
ative Severity Score for the enUmeration of Mortality   The Sepsis 3 guidelines [59] recommend the use of
(POSSUM), Portsmouth-POSSUM    (P-POSSUM), Modi-     quick Sepsis-related Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA)
ﬁed Early Warning Score (MEWS) and National Early    as a screening tool to identify patients who are at risk of
Warning Score (NEWS) (UK) [51]. In particular deterio- developing sepsis and septic shock. A positive qSOFA
rating early warning scores, in comparison to stable or score should prompt further investigation for organ dys-
improving scores, are highly predictive of mortality [52]. function, to initiate or escalate therapy as appropriate, and
  Recommendations:                                   to consider referral to critical care or increase the fre-
                                                     quency of monitoring. The qSOFA score may have limi-
•  Resuscitation and correction of underlying physiolog-
                                                     tations for emergency surgery patients and the use of the
   ical derangement should begin immediately and should
                                                     EWS to identify deterioration due to sepsis outperformed
   continue during diagnostic pathways.
                                                     SIRS and qSOFA score in one large study [51]. In a review
•  Rapid  assessment of the patient for physiological
                                                     of sepsis-screening tools for surgery, it was noted that signs
   derangement using a validated method [49] such as
                                                     of sepsis in surgical patients may be diffuse and there is no
   an Early Warning Scoring (EWS) system should occur.
                                                     perfect screening tool—what is clear is that when screening
   Abnormal scores should trigger rapid escalation to
                                                     tools are used there is increased recognition of sepsis [60].
   senior personnel in line with pre-established local
                                                        Once sepsis is suspected clinically, validated manage-
   protocols. While awaiting surgery patients should have
                                                     ment algorithms should be completed with a sense of
   regular re-evaluation, with a frequency dictated by
                                                     urgency [46, 61, 62]. These algorithms all include the
   local physiological track and trigger protocols.
                                                     empiric administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics (after
                                                     relevant cultures have been obtained when possible), and
  Level of evidence: High.                           cardiovascular resuscitation using intravenous ﬂuids titra-
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      ted to clinical endpoints. Speciﬁc antibiotic choice should
                                                     be guided by local protocols in line with antimicrobial
                                                     stewardship. Further evaluation and escalation should also
2. Screen and monitor for sepsis and accompanying    follow these algorithms (Fig. 1). The NELA 2019 report
physiological derangement                            found that there was major room for improvement in speed
                                                     and urgency of management with only 19%  of patients
The presence of sepsis should be considered in all patients with suspected sepsis receiving antibiotics within the ﬁrst
undergoing emergency surgery at presentation. One large hour [17]. Studies have shown an association between early
prospective study found an incidence of over 20% of sepsis risk scoring, active management and a reduction in mor-
or septic shock in patients presenting to an emergency tality [1, 17]. Blood lactate has been used as a marker of
general surgical service [53]. Upregulation of the inﬂam- risk [63], and in monitoring of response to resuscitation in
matory response as occurs with SIRS and sepsis is a major line with the Surviving Sepsis guidelines [46, 63].
contributor to death; one major study found an increased Recommendations:
hazard ratio of death in emergency surgical patients of 1.9

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1279

 Fig. 1 The hour-1 surviving
 sepsis campaign bundle of care.
 From Levy et al. [63]


•  All patients for emergency laparotomy should be   perforation with septic shock found no patients survived to
   assessed with a validated sepsis score as early in their 60 days if surgery was delayed more than 6 h [66]. In
   presentation as possible. This should be repeated at another Danish cohort of all high-risk emergency laparo-
   appropriate intervals in line with severity of signs and tomy patients including those with obstruction as well as
   sepsis risk stratiﬁcation guidance [61, 63].      perforation, no statistically signiﬁcant adjusted association
•  If SIRS, sepsis or septic shock are diagnosed, or when between delay and surgical mortality at 90 days was found
   the underlying surgical pathology makes the patient at [67]. In a study from the NELA database, speciﬁcally
   high risk of infection or sepsis, such as patients with focusing on small bowel obstruction, increased mortality
   peritonitis or hollow viscus perforation, treatment was found for patients delayed more than 72 h [68]. In a
   should begin immediately in line with the Surviving multi-center study of septic patients in German ICUs when
   Sepsis management algorithms including measurement source control was needed, a delay of 6 h or more was
   of lactate [46]. Delay to antibiotic administration in associated with increased mortality [69]. Multimodal
   patients with sepsis increases mortality [64].    perioperative cohort intervention studies in emergency
•  Monitoring of blood lactate as a marker of risk and in laparotomy have all had a surgical delay target of \ 6h
   assessment of physiological response to resuscitation from time of decision to operate to surgery, and have been
   should be considered even in the absence of sepsis. associated with improved outcome [1, 3, 6, 29]. However,
                                                     none of these studies have analyzed the impact of delay on
                                                     survival in patients with perforation versus patients with
  Level of evidence: High-large prospective cohort studies obstruction. While these two clinical entities comprise the
  and international guidelines.                      majority of indications for emergency laparotomy, the
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      initial pathophysiology may be quite different. Patients
                                                     with perforations often present with sepsis and the data are
3. Early imaging, surgery, and source control of sepsis very clear that there should be minimal delay to surgical
                                                     intervention, while the perioperative pathophysiology of
Delay to surgical intervention can be due to any or all of patients with obstruction is poorly researched and the
the following: delayed diagnosis, preoperative therapeutic impact of delay and  resuscitation less clear
interventions/optimization or logistics. However, delay for [3, 57, 65, 66, 68, 70]. Standards for time to surgery have
patients undergoing emergency laparotomy can lead to been set in the UK by the Royal College of Surgeons
increased mortality. In a Danish National cohort of perfo- [70, 71] and monitored by NELA and have been shown to
rated peptic ulcers, there was a 2.4% decreased probability be achievable at the 80% level [17].
of survival for every hour delay from hospital admission Recommendations:
[65]. A large UK study of perforated peptic ulcer found that • Delay to surgery increases mortality in patients with
for patients in shock there was an increase of 6% in risk- sepsis and septic shock. All patients with septic shock
adjusted odds of death for every hour laparotomy was    should receive source control with surgery or interven-
delayed after admission [57]. A small Japanese study of tional radiology as soon as possible and within 3 h. For

                                                                                               123


1280                                                                         World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

   patients with sepsis without septic shock, source control involvement of highly experienced staff and helps direct
   should occur within 6 h.                          discussion with the patient and family. There are a number
                                                     of surgical or disease-speciﬁc risk prediction tools [76–80].
                                                     Some, such as the Portsmouth-POSSUM   (P-POSSUM)
  Level of evidence: High-large prospective cohort stud- score [77], were developed many years ago for retrospec-
  ies, large  retrospective cohort studies, national tive comparison of observed and expected outcomes when
  guidelines.                                        all variables are known. There is some concern regarding
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      over-interpretation of individual patient preoperative pre-
                                                     diction when these scores are used prospectively, and some
Radiological investigation Examination and identiﬁca- variables must be estimated. Risk prediction scores give a
tion of clinical signs are the main means of diagnosis of an population risk based on a risk model, scores can over and
acute abdomen. However, patients who undergo emer-   under-estimate risk for individual patients and clinicians
gency laparotomy present both in the emergency depart- must be cautious in using these scores for prognosticating
ment and on hospital wards, with complications secondary patient outcomes. An example is a patient with a perforated
to primary surgery or initial misdiagnosis of their condi- peptic ulcer, who is acutely unwell with markedly deranged
tion. NELA has shown signiﬁcant delays to surgical review physiology and a very high-risk score, but who may beneﬁt
(up to 8 times longer) if the initial presentation is to an from rapid relatively simple surgery.
internal medicine team [17]. The gold standard for diag- The large number of patients in the NELA database and
nosis is abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with the American College of Surgeons NSQIP database have
intravenous contrast, which is recommended as ‘‘usually allowed development of speciﬁc risk tools for patients
appropriate’’ for all presentations of acute abdomen unless undergoing emergency laparotomy which more consis-
eGFR is less than 30 (mL/min/1.73 m2)[72]. Intravenous tently predict the actual risk for high-risk patients [78, 79].
contrast improves diagnostic information and the risk of A recent review comparing the NELA tool with ACS-
allergic reaction or acute kidney injury to iodinated con- NSQIP, P-POSSUM and APACHE II found the NELA
trast is minimal [73, 74]. CT scans allow surgeons to score showed the highest discrimination with an area under
visualize the problem and plan an optimal approach with the curve (AUC) of 0.83, ACS-NSQIP had an AUC of 0.80
the goal of reducing complications. However, CT scans [81]. When a risk score was calculated retrospectively on
and other diagnostic tests can present a time delay, and patients in the NELA dataset who had not been risk scored
optimal diagnostic pathways to minimize delay should be preoperatively or at the end of surgery, those patients were
used [75].                                           less likely to have potentially protective perioperative
  Recommendation:                                    interventions such as planned postoperative critical care
                                                     admission, and had poorer outcomes than a risk matched
  Perform a CT scan with IV contrast as soon as possible if cohort who had prospective risk scoring performed [17].
  indicated. The CT  scan should be reviewed by a    Having a risk score available preoperatively may facilitate
  radiologist immediately. Acquiring a CT scan should communication and planning for patient care. An ethno-
  not cause a delay to surgery if surgery is very urgent. graphic study of surgical teams, particularly those who did
  Level of evidence: High.                           not routinely manage emergency surgical patients, found
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      that use of a score enhanced inter-professional communi-
                                                     cation and decision making [82].
4. Risk assessment                                      Most risk prediction tools do not directly adjust for
                                                     certain relatively uncommon co-morbidities and some
Risk assessment has become an important tool to support speciﬁc acute abdominal pathologies (other than cancer)
clinical assessment in management of patients undergoing which probably impact signiﬁcantly on the survivability of
emergency laparotomy [70]. Risk scoring was promoted in an emergency laparotomy. Examples include a patient with
the ﬁrst Higher Risk Surgical patient guidelines in the UK a severe neurological condition or a patient with bowel
[71], as many laparotomy patients were not receiving care infarction. When applying a risk prediction tool to an
appropriate to their risk, such as planned admission post- individual patient it is prudent to consider whether there are
operatively to an ICU. Clinical teams, inexperienced in additional risk-altering variables present that have not been
management of emergency laparotomy, underestimated the taken into account in any calculation. Additionally, these
potential for poor outcome. A risk score facilitates com- models are derived from patients who underwent surgery
munication amongst clinical teams about priorities and and do not include those evaluated for surgery but declined
pathways  including  for  patient transfer, prompts  secondary to prohibitive risk.
                                                        Recommendation:
123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1281

•  A  risk score using a validated model should be   signiﬁcant reduction in mortality, length of stay and dis-
   performed and documented on all patients prior to charge to a higher level of care [95]. Proactive manage-
   surgery, and at the end of surgery. The score can be ment of these frail patients may also decrease the costs of
   used to guide pathways of care and facilitate discussion care [97, 98]. At present the evidence indicates that most
   between team members and with patients and family on older emergency laparotomy patients are not reliably
   treatment, risks and limitations.                 assessed for frailty nor co-managed with a care of the
                                                     elderly team [17].

  Level of evidence: High.                           Delirium  and  perioperative neurocognitive disorders
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      Patients over 65 years of age who undergo emergency
                                                     surgery are at particular risk for delirium and perioperative
5. Age-related evaluation of frailty, and cognitive  neurocognitive disorders [99–101]. All patients over
assessment                                           65 years of age and any with risk factors for preexisting
                                                     cognitive impairment should have a baseline assessment of
Age and frailty are not the same. Frailty is deﬁned as an cognition with a simple screening tool [102–105] and a
age-related state of decreased physiologic reserve [83]. All preoperative assessment of delirium. Patients should be
the large studies show that age alone is signiﬁcantly monitored regularly for delirium with awareness that
associated with poor outcomes for emergency laparotomy hypoactive delirium occurs more commonly than an agi-
[14]. In NELA mortality for patients over 80 years old in tated delirious state and has a poorer outcome [106]. The
particular, remains very high at 17% at 30 days and 22% at American College of Surgeons and the American Geriatric
90 days [17]. Clearly the risk for these patients is so high Society (AGS) have joint guidelines on how to prevent,
that if emergency surgery is to be performed meticulous diagnose and care for delirium in the surgical patient [104].
delivery of all evidence-based pathway components is If delirium should occur, it is associated with increased
essential. An ERAS approach has been shown to reduce mortality, complications, readmission, and long-term cog-
mortality in patients over the age of 70 [1, 6]. A systematic nitive decline [107, 108]. Delirium is preventable in about
review found an ERAS approach to be beneﬁcial for older 40% of cases with simple steps [104, 109, 110] and
patients undergoing emergency surgery [7]. Many of these avoidance of drugs that fall under AGS Beers criteria
patients will also be frail, resulting in a lack of resilience in drugs, such as benzodiazepines and anticholinergics
the face of a physiological insult [84–87], and a validated [109, 111] Table 2. Incorporation of a ‘‘hospital elder life
frailty assessment [70, 83, 88, 89] should be performed if program’’ with simple measures such as mouth care and
possible acknowledging the limitations in the acute envi- regular orienting communication for patients undergoing
ronment. Frail patients and those with cognitive impair- major elective intra-abdominal surgery demonstrated a
ment have a higher risk of mortality and morbidity which signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of delirium [110].
may not be captured by the commonly used surgical risk  Recommendations:
scores [70, 81, 90]. In a study of outcomes at 12 months in • All patients over 65 years of age, and others at high
older patients after emergency laparotomy, the strongest risk, for example patients with cancer, should be
predictors of mortality were frailty and increased American assessed for frailty using a validated frailty score [83].
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status [91]. Involve- Evidence: High.
ment of a physician specialized in the care of older adults Recommendation grade: Strong.
to co-manage these patients, and/or the use of targeted • Perform a validated simple assessment of cognitive
interventions should occur as soon as possible and is   function such as the Mini-CogÒ [112] in all patients
associated with better outcomes. The strongest evidence for over 65 years of age if time permits. For patients who
comprehensive geriatric assessment exists for patients with are at risk for delirium and postoperative cognitive
hip fractures [92–95], but a recent paper shows postoper- dysfunction take steps to keep the patient oriented and
ative geriatrician review was associated with reduced   avoid drugs known to cause harm as deﬁned in the
mortality in patients over the age of 65 years undergoing Beers’ criteria [111].
emergency laparotomy [26, 96]. Another recent study using Level of evidence: Moderate.
a proactive approach for patients over 65 years presenting Recommendation grade: Strong.
for emergency general surgery with integration of a geri- • All patients over 65 should have regular delirium
atric assessment team, optimization of evidence-based   screening pre and postoperatively with a validated
elder-friendly practices, promotion of patient-oriented assessment method [113].
rehabilitation, and early discharge planning found a

                                                                                               123


1282                                                                         World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

Table 2 Medications commonly given in perioperative care that should be avoided or used with caution in patients over 65 year of age adapted
from the 2019 American geriatric society Beers criteria [111] and Berger et al. [103]
Medication or class of medication Examples                      Rationale for avoiding

First generation antihistamines   Diphenhydramine, Chlorpheniramine Central anticholinergic effects
Phenothiazine-type antiemetics    Prochlorperazine, Promethazine Central anticholinergic effects
Antispasmodics/anticholinergics   Atropine, Scopolamine         Central anticholinergic effects
Antipsychotics(ﬁrst and second generation) Haloperidol          Risk of cognitive impairment, delirium, neuroleptic
                                                                  malignant syndrome, tardive dyskinesia
Benzodiazepines                   Midazolam, Diazepam, Temazepam Risk of cognitive impairment, delirium
Benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics Zolpidem, Eszopiclone Delirium, falls
  ‘‘ Z drugs’’
Corticosteroids                   Hydrocortisone, Methylprednisolone Risk of cognitive impairment, delirium, psychosis

H2-receptor antagonists           Ranitidine                    Risk of cognitive impairment, delirium
Metoclopramide                                                  Extrapyramidal effects
Pethidine/Meperidine                                            Neurotoxic effect

H2, histamine 2 receptor.

   Level of evidence: High.                          (PTT) among others should be obtained preoperatively
   Recommendation grade: Strong.                     where appropriate, although conventional clotting studies do
•  Patients over 65 years of age should be assessed by a not help with low molecular weight heparin or DOACs. A
   physician with expertise in care of the older patient variety of platelet function tests are available and should be
   (geriatrician) pre-operatively and evidence-based elder- considered for patients taking antiplatelet therapy
   friendly practices used. If preoperative assessment is [124, 125]. The decision to reverse antithrombotic medica-
   not possible refer for postoperative follow-up.   tion should be based on the patient’s immediate need for
                                                     surgery, the risk of associated bleeding, and the risk of
                                                     thromboembolism [121, 122].
  Level of evidence: Low.
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      Anticoagulants (Warfarin,  DOACs,   Heparin/Enoxa-
                                                     parin)  Prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) and fresh
6. Reversal of antithrombotic medications            frozen plasma may be administered and titrated to the
                                                     required effect in these cases [121, 122]. Speciﬁc reversal
Anticoagulants and platelet function inhibitors Long-term agents exist for DOAC medications and can be used if
antiplatelet and anticoagulation use is increasingly common available. Dabigatran has a reversal agent idarucizumab
in many populations, and their management in emergency [126] and recombinant factor Xa functions to reverse
surgery is complex. Patients undergoing  emergency   apixaban and rivaroxaban [127].
laparotomy are at high risk of perioperative hemorrhage and Recommendation:
thrombosis, given both the nature of their procedure and the • Strongly consider reversal of home anticoagulation
underlying coagulopathy of sepsis and systemic inﬂamma- medications when   major surgical intervention is
tion [114]. Hemorrhage following surgery is highly-associ- planned. This decision should be based on both the
ated with end-organ dysfunction and mortality in emergency patient’s risk of procedure-related bleeding and the risk
general surgical patients [115–119]. Reversal of these agents of thromboembolism.
or their effects prior to emergent surgery, when possible,
may reduce the risk of perioperative hemorrhage. Vitamin K
antagonists such as warfarin are common, although newer Level of evidence: Moderate.
direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are increasingly Recommendation grade: Strong.
used [120]. Guidance on reversal of speciﬁc antithrombotic
medications and platelet function inhibitors has been pub-
                                                     Platelet inhibitors: (including Aspirin, Clopidogrel,
lished by various societies and is beyond the scope of this
                                                     Dipyridamole, Ticagrelor) Patients taking antiplatelet
article [121–124]. To guide management decisions, coagu-
                                                     medications may be considered for platelet transfusion if
lation tests including international normalized ratio (INR),
                                                     warranted given the risk of bleeding from the planned
prothrombin time (PT), and partial thromboplastin time

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1283

operation. There is some evidence that transfused platelets 8. Pre-anesthetic medication—anxiolysis and analgesia
may partially reverse the effects of these medications
[122, 128]. If a patient is taking only aspirin at the time of Patients with an acute abdomen often require strong anal-
surgery, many surgeons elect to proceed without reversal gesia. Pain should be assessed, and an appropriate inter-
[121, 129]. Patients taking dual antiplatelet therapy are vention should be made using multimodal analgesic
likely at higher risk of bleeding complications and trans- titration and by minimizing the amount of opioid used to
fusion [125, 130]. P2Y12 and aspirin response assays are achieve effective analgesia. Opioids increase the risk of a
available in some hospitals to assess the impairment of patient being over-sedated, hypo-ventilating and even
platelet function by these drugs. If the risk of surgical delay aspirating, so appropriate monitoring should be performed.
is high, a reasonable approach may be to proceed to sur- The addition of benzodiazepines or other sedative agents
gery and transfuse platelets if excess bleeding is encoun- compound these risks and should be avoided, and can
tered [125]. For patients with recent coronary artery increase the risk of postoperative delirium in older patients
stenting, given the risk of adverse cardiac events consul- [106]. The use of preoperative nerve blocks such as
tation and co-management of antiplatelet therapy with a transversus abdominis plane (TAP) blocks prior to surgery
cardiologist is recommended.                         do not address the peritoneal and visceral pain of an acute
  Recommendation:                                    abdomen. Therefore, opioids are often necessary in addi-
                                                     tion to other multimodal agents. Non-steroidal anti-in-
•  Consider platelet transfusion in patients taking anti-
                                                     ﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are best avoided, due to the
   platelet therapy when the planned procedural bleeding
                                                     high risk of acute kidney injury (AKI) in this population,
   risk is high. In patients with a strong indication for
                                                     until postoperatively when renal function has normalized
   antiplatelets, specialty consultation should be obtained
                                                     [44, 135, 136].
   for perioperative co-management of these medications.
                                                        Recommendations:
                                                     •  Sedative medication should be avoided preoperatively
  Level of evidence: Low.                               to avoid the risk of micro-aspiration, hypoventilation
  Recommendation grade: Weak.                           and delirium.

7. Assessment of venous thromboembolism risk
                                                       Evidence: Moderate.
                                                       Recommendation grade: Strong.
Compared with elective surgical patients undergoing a
comparable intra-abdominal procedure, emergency patients • Analgesia should be given to alleviate the patient’s pain
are at increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE)   and stress.
[131, 132]. Patients should be assessed for risk with a
validated tool at admission, and VTE prophylaxis (me-
chanical and/or pharmacologic) should be initiated as soon Evidence: High.
as possible even if surgery is planned [131, 133, 134]. If Recommendation grade: Strong.
pharmaceutical prophylaxis is not an option, mechanical • Multi modal opioid-sparing analgesia should be titrated
prophylaxis should be used. The patient should be reas- to effect to maximize comfort and minimize side-
sessed at regular intervals pre and postoperatively [131]. effects.
  Recommendation:
•  Patients should be risk assessed with a validated tool
   for VTE risk on admission. If pharmaceutical prophy- Evidence: High.
   laxis is not possible mechanical prophylaxis should be Recommendation grade: Strong.
   used. Reassessment should occur daily postoperatively
   [131].                                            9. Preoperative glucose and electrolyte management

                                                     Perioperative glucose control is important to maintain body
  Level of evidence: Strong (extrapolated from studies in homeostasis and reduce downstream complications [137].
  elective major abdominal surgery).                 Hyperglycemia  during and after surgery is common,
  Recommendation grade: Strong.                      occurring in 20–40% of elective surgical patients, particu-
                                                     larly in diabetic patients or those with impaired glucose
                                                     tolerance. Elevated blood glucose impairs neutrophil

                                                                                               123


1284                                                                         World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

function and can cause overproduction of inﬂammatory    Recommendations:
mediators, reactive oxygen species and free fatty acids
                                                     •  Hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are risk factors for
causing direct cellular damage, vascular endothelial changes
                                                        adverse postoperative outcomes. Pre-operatively, glu-
and immune dysfunction. Substantial evidence indicates that
                                                        cose levels should be maintained at 144–180 mg/dL
correction of hyperglycemia with insulin administration
                                                        (8–10 mmol/L), a variable rate (sliding scale) insulin
reduces hospital complications and decreases mortality in
                                                        infusion should be used judiciously to maintain blood
general surgery patients [137–139]. The stress response
                                                        glucose in this range with appropriate monitoring of
drives insulin resistance at a time when patients are likely to
                                                        point of care blood glucose in line with local protocols
have poor oral calorie intake and omit their insulin or dia-
                                                        to avoid hypoglycemia.
betic tablets for fear of hypoglycemia. ERAS pathways for
                                                     •  Correction of potassium, magnesium and phosphate
elective surgery try to mitigate this insulin resistance by
                                                        prior to surgery should be done using the intravenous
using components such as oral carbohydrate loading and
                                                        route with appropriate monitoring and following local
regional anesthesia [44]. However, this is usually not fea-
                                                        hospital policy. However, it should not delay the patient
sible in emergency laparotomy patients.
                                                        from being taken to the operating room.
  A  proactive approach to avoid both hyper and hypo-
glycemia should be taken in emergency laparotomy patients.
Pre-operative blood glucose levels should be controlled in a Level of evidence: moderate (inconsistency, extrapolated,
similar  range  to  critical care  patients—between    uncertain target glucose values, potassium and magne-
144–180 mg/dL  (8–10 mmol/L). Tight control of blood   sium extrapolated from cardiac and critical care data).
sugar has been relaxed since the ﬁrst tight glycemic control Recommendation grade: weak (beneﬁt must be out-
ICU studies, the incidence of complications appears not to weighed against the risk of hypoglycemia, diabetic
be signiﬁcantly altered when allowing blood glucose to be patients likely to beneﬁt the most, the risk of atrial
180 mg/dL  (10 mmol/L) [140] but with a reduction in   ﬁbrillation may be reduced by ﬂuid and electrolyte
hypoglycemic  neurological complications [141]. Most   correction, but the cause is multifactorial).
patients will be taking minimal calories by mouth and be
receiving intravenous resuscitation and ongoing mainte-
nance ﬂuid with balanced crystalloid infusions which con- 10. Preoperative carbohydrate loading
tain no glucose. Hypoglycemia should be treated with an
intravenous 50% dextrose bolus and appropriate follow-up An oral carbohydrate drink given preoperatively is a rec-
dextrose administration, again according to local hospital ommendation in most other ERAS Society Guidelines to
policy. It is unclear for hyperglycemia, whether a basal- reduce dehydration and improve insulin sensitivity by
bolus of insulin [138] is beneﬁcial compared with a standard giving a carbohydrate load 2–4 h prior to surgery. Emer-
sliding scale in the emergency surgical population. Judicious gency laparotomy patients are already under physiological
use of a variable rate insulin infusion (sliding scale) regimen stress and giving carbohydrates in this setting may elevate
should be utilized according to local hospital policy and glucose levels further with no effect on insulin sensitivity.
attention given to plasma potassium levels that can be We could not identify any studies on the use or beneﬁt of
lowered by insulin administration. The ongoing manage- carbohydrate loading in emergency general surgery. The
ment of glucose control is outlined in Part 2 of this Guide- increased risk of gastric stasis, intra-abdominal pathology,
line. An HbA1c taken on admission is useful in guiding preoperative use of opioids and generalized practice of
whether a patient has long-term glycemic control issues and using preoperative nasogastric tubes and avoiding oral
may aid decision making on clinical intervention.    intake prior to surgery meant we extrapolated evidence of
  Electrolyte disturbance is common in this group of potential harm and this group could not recommend the use
patients due to high ﬂuid shifts and external losses of body of carbohydrate loading [44].
ﬂuids. Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia  and  hypophos-      Recommendation:
phatemia are risk factors for cardiac dysrhythmias, partic- Level of evidence: Low and potential harm.
ularly atrial ﬁbrillation which is particularly common in Recommendation grade: Strong, do not use in the
this patient group due to age and preexisting atrial ﬁbril- emergency laparotomy population.
lation, ﬂuid shifts, electrolyte imbalance and septic shock
needing vasopressor infusions. Attempts should be made to
correct low potassium, phosphate and magnesium using 11. Pre-operative nasogastric intubation
intravenous repletion with appropriate monitoring and
according to local policy to reduce the risk of atrial ﬁb- Nasogastric tubes (NGTs) have been traditionally used in
rillation [142].                                     emergency surgery to reduce gastric distension and drain
123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                   1285

gastric contents. The use of nasogastric tubes in elective scenario may support a clear structured standardized
colorectal surgical patients is declining as the evidence approach [149, 150, 153]. Discussions should not just be
base has shown an increase in complications such as res- about life or death, but loss of independence, quality of life
piratory infections and pharyngolaryngitis as well as and other important factors to patients, such as long-term
patient discomfort and delay to feeding, [143, 144] with no stoma formation [154]. There is guidance available to
change in morbidity or mortality. [145]. The use in the surgical teams to help manage these situations [155]
emergency setting is very different with a risk–beneﬁt ratio although the complexity and acuity of the situation means
depending on the clinical circumstances and cause of that eliciting patient preference and achieving goal- con-
abdominal pathology and patient factors. Patients may have cordant care is challenging [156]. The goal should be to
pathology causing gastric distension and high gastric ﬂuid achieve active joint and realistic decision making before
volumes, and decompression may be beneﬁcial and reduce surgery. For all patients and families, satisfaction with
the risk of aspiration at induction of anesthesia. This risk emergency abdominal surgery is associated with receiving
beneﬁt is different in the preoperative and postoperative sufﬁcient information about the risks and beneﬁts of sur-
setting. We therefore discuss the postoperative use and gery [20, 149, 157], and it is feasible to collect patient
continuation in part 2 of this guideline.            reported outcome  measures from  patients who have
  Recommendations:                                   undergone emergency laparotomy [158].
                                                        Recommendation:
•  Pre-operative nasogastric tube insertion should be
   considered on an individual basis assessing for the risk • Patients and families should have the opportunity to
   of aspiration and gastric distension depending on the discuss the risk of surgery with a senior physician (this
   pathology and patient factors.                       could be the surgeon, anesthesiologist or intensive care
                                                        physician) prior to surgery. Counseling should be
                                                        informed by a validated risk score but with the clear
  Level of evidence: Moderate (extrapolation from elec- understanding that scores have  limitations when
  tive surgery).                                        applied to individual patients. When appropriate,
  Recommendation grade: Strong (aspiration can be life- treatment escalation plans and advance care plans
  threatening and its reduction by nasogastric insertion should be discussed and documented.
  outweighs the risk of short-term use).             •  Clear, concise, written information or decision aids
                                                        combined with verbal patient education should be
12. Patient and family education and shared decision    provided to the patient and family before surgery if
making                                                  possible.

Patient education is a central pillar of elective enhanced
                                                       Level of evidence: Low.
recovery pathways, beneﬁts include reduced pain and
                                                       Recommendation   grade: Strong (improves informed
anxiety [146–148]. There is less time for education or
                                                       consent process).
explanation of complex surgery in the emergency setting,
although handouts can be given to patients and families to
read before or after surgery. In very high-risk patients,
surgery should not be undertaken without discussion about Conclusions
ceilings of care, even though this is challenging in the acute
situation. Objective mortality scores can support conver- These guidelines present the current evidence base and
sations and should be used in combination with other recommendations for the preoperative phase of an ERAS
assessments such as frailty scores [70, 149]. Shared deci- approach to patients undergoing emergency laparotomy.
sion making (SDM) and personalization of care is espe- Such an approach has been shown to improve outcomes for
cially challenging in a patient in pain and with acute these very high-risk patients. An increased awareness of
physiological disturbance from abdominal pathology [150]. the speciﬁc risks of older patients with attention to peri-
Additionally, there is less time to develop the clinician- operative neurocognitive disorders, frailty and geriatric
patient rapport/relationship which SDM relies upon [151]. care is a new addition to ERAS guidelines. The evidence
Scenario planning and the use of decision aids may support base is low in certain areas and much has been extrapolated
SDM, helping to move detailed, complex conversations from elective ERAS guidelines and other evidence based
toward more  rapidly understood and patient-centered on planned surgery. While it would be ideal to test all
information [152]. Using the BRAN methodology (‘bene- elements in the emergency situation, the lack of random-
ﬁts, risks, alternatives, do nothing) or best/worst case ized controlled trials in this patient group demonstrates the

                                                                                               123


1286                                                                                    World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

challenges of research in this area. Other concepts relevant if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
to the care of the emergency laparotomy patient such as     article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
                                                            indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
organization of surgical services, end-of-life care and other included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
ERAS elements will be covered in Part 2 of these guide-     use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
lines. It is hoped that these pre-operative guidelines, when use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
paired with the intra, and postoperative guidelines will    holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
                                                            org/licenses/by/4.0/.
provide a framework for improved management of patients
undergoing emergency laparotomy.
                                                            References

Author contributions CP contributed to literature review, grading of 1. Huddart S, Peden CJ, Swart M et al (2015) Use of a pathway
evidence, and drafted, edited, and made a substantial contribution to quality improvement care bundle to reduce mortality after
ﬁnalizing the manuscript. MS performed literature review, grading of emergency laparotomy. Br J Surg 102:57–66
evidence, and also contributed to the writing of the manuscript. Both 2. Lohsiriwat V (2014) Enhanced recovery after surgery vs con-
CJ and MS organized the Delphi method amongst the authors. WBF   ventional care in emergency colorectal surgery. World J Gas-
and JK contributed to literature review, reference organization, and to troenterol 20:13950–13955
writing the manuscript. DL, CW, MH, NL, OL, IA, RU, RA, MG, FH, 3. Møller MH, Adamsen S, Thomsen RW et al (2011) Multicentre
SH, JH, CO, GA, SM, NQ, DH, ZC, T Y-F and JD contributed to      trial of a perioperative protocol to reduce mortality in patients
writing and revising the paper, critical appraisal, and grading of with peptic ulcer perforation. Br J Surg 98:802–810
evidence.                                                      4. Wisely JC, Barclay KL (2016) Effects of an enhanced recovery
                                                                 after surgery programme on emergency surgical patients. ANZ J
Funding None.                                                    Surg 86:883–888
                                                               5. Roulin D, Blanc C, Muradbegovic M et al (2014) Enhanced
Compliance with ethical standards                                recovery pathway for urgent colectomy. World  J Surg
                                                                 38:2153–2159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-014-2518-y
Conﬂict of interest Dr. Peden has received consultancy fees from 6. Aggarwal G, Peden CJ, Mohammed MA et al (2019) Evaluation
the American College of Surgeons Improving Care and Surgical     of the collaborative use of an evidence-based care bundle in
Recovery program and from the Institute for Healthcare Improve-  emergency laparotomy. JAMA Surg 154:e190145
ment, and from Merck for unrelated work. Dr. Scott has honoraria 7. Paduraru M, Ponchietti L, Casas IM et al (2017) Enhanced
from and serves on advisory boards of Baxter, Edwards Lifesciences, recovery after surgery (ERAS)—the evidence in geriatric
Deltex, Trevena, and Merck. He also receives travel reimbursement emergency surgery: a systematic review. Chirurgia 112:546–557
from these companies. Dr. Lobo has received speaker honoraria for 8. Gonenc M, Dural AC, Celik F et al (2014) Enhanced postop-
unrelated work from Fresenius Kabi in the last 3 years and is the erative recovery pathways in emergency surgery: a randomised
Scientiﬁc Chair of the ERASÒ Society. Dr. Wu has nothing to dis- controlled clinical trial. Am J Surg 207:807–814
close. Dr. Hu¨bner has nothing to disclose. Dr. Lees has nothing to 9. Mohsina S, Shanmugam D, Sureshkumar S et al (2018) Adapted
disclose. Dr. Urman has received research funding or fees from   ERAS pathway vs. standard care in patients with perforated
Merck, Covidien/Medtronic, AcelRx, Pﬁzer and Takeda outside the  duodenal ulcer—a randomized controlled trial. J Gastrointest
submitted work, as well as federal funding from NIH, AHRQ and    Surg 22:107–116
NSF. Dr. Aitken has nothing to disclose. Dr. Grant has nothing to 10. Shida D, Tagawa K, Inada K et al (2017) Modiﬁed enhanced
disclose. Dr. Hammarqvist has nothing to disclose. Dr. Hare has  recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols for patients with
nothing to disclose. Dr. Havens has research grant funding from  obstructive colorectal cancer. BMC Surg 17:18
Johnson and Johnson outside the submitted work. Dr Ljungqvist is the 11. Shang Y, Guo C, Zhang D (2018) Modiﬁed enhanced recovery
Chairman of the ERASÒ Society, founded and owns stock in Encare  after surgery protocols are beneﬁcial for postoperative recovery
AB, and has received honoraria for advice, lecturing including travel for patients undergoing emergency surgery for obstructive col-
support from Nutricia, Fresenius-Kabi, Pharamcosmos, Encare AB,  orectal cancer. Medicine 97:e12348
and lecturing honoraria from Medtronic and BBraun outside the 12. Symons NRA, Moorthy K, Almoudaris AM et al (2013) Mor-
related work. Dr Ljungqvist previously held a now expired patent for tality in high-risk emergency general surgical admissions. Br J
a preoperative carbohydrate drink. Dr. Ordon˜ez has nothing to dis- Surg 100:1318–1325
close. Dr. Kim has nothing to disclose. Dr. French has nothing to 13. Shaﬁ S, Aboutanos MB, Agarwal S Jr et al (2013) Emergency
disclose. Dr. Aggarwal has nothing to disclose. Dr. Quiney has   general surgery: deﬁnition and estimated burden of disease.
nothing to disclose. Dr. Holena has nothing to disclose. Dr. Cooper J Trauma Acute Care Surg 74:1092–1097
has nothing to disclose. Dr. Wick has funding from the Agency for 14. Al-Temimi MH, Griffee M, Enniss TM et al (2012) When is
Healthcare Research and Quality outside the submitted work. Dr.  death inevitable after emergency laparotomy? Analysis of the
Bang Foss has nothing to disclose. Dr. Young-Fadok has nothing to American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
disclose. Dr. Mohseni has nothing to disclose. Dr. Dhesi has nothing Improvement Program database. J Am Coll Surg 215:503–511
to disclose.                                                  15. Lee KC, Sturgeon D, Lipsitz S et al (2020) Mortality and health
                                                                 care utilization among Medicare patients undergoing emergency
                                                                 general surgery vs those with acute medical conditions. JAMA
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons    Surg 155:216–223
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 16. American College of Surgeons (2018) User Guide for the 2017
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as ACS NSQIP Participant Use Data File. https://www.facs.org/
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the Quality-Programs/ACS-NSQIP/participant-use Accessed on
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 11/17/2020

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                                 1287

 17. NELA Project Team (2019) Fifth Patient Report of the National 35. Louis DJ, Hsu A, Brand MI, Saclarides TJ (2009) Morbidity and
    Emergency Laparotomy Audit. https://www.nela.org.uk/down     mortality in octogenarians and older undergoing major intestinal
    loads/The%20Fifth%20Patient%20Report%20of%20the%             surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 52:59–63
    20NELA%202019%20-%20Full%20Patient%20Report.pdf           36. Foss NB, Kehlet H (2020) Challenges in optimising recovery
    Accessed on 11/17/2020                                       after emergency laparotomy. Anaesthesia 75(Suppl 1):e83–e89
 18. Vester-Andersen M, Lundstrøm LH, Møller MH et al (2014)  37. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R et al (2008) Going from evi-
    Mortality and postoperative care pathways after emergency    dence to recommendations. BMJ 336:1049–1051
    gastrointestinal surgery in 2904 patients: a population-based 38. Brown BB (1968) Delphi process: a methodology used for the
    cohort study. Br J Anaesth 112:860–870                       elicitation of opinions of experts. RAND Corporation, Santa
 19. Saunders DI, Murray D, Pichel AC et al (2012) Variations in Monica, CA
    mortality after emergency laparotomy: the ﬁrst report of the UK 39. Brindle M, Nelson G, Lobo DN et al (2020) Recommendations
    Emergency Laparotomy Network. Br J Anaesth 109:368–375       from the ERASÒ Society for standards for the development of
 20. Cauley CE, Panizales MT, Reznor G et al (2015) Outcomes after enhanced recovery after surgery guidelines. BJS Open
    emergency abdominal surgery in patients with advanced cancer: 4:157–163
    opportunities to reduce complications and improve palliative 40. NELA Project Team (2017) Audit Inclusion and Exclusion
    care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 79:399–406                    Criteria: NELA Inclusion Criteria. In: National Emergency
 21. Havens JM, Peetz AB, Do WS et al (2015) The excess morbidity Laparotomy Audit. https://www.nela.org.uk/Criteria. Accessed
    and mortality of emergency general surgery. J Trauma Acute   20 Aug 2019
    Care Surg 78:306–311                                      41. Feeney T, Castillo-Angeles M, Scott JW et al (2018) The
 22. Columbus AB, Morris MA, Lilley EJ et al (2018) Critical dif- independent effect of emergency general surgery on outcomes
    ferences between elective and emergency surgery: identifying varies depending on case type: a NSQIP outcomes study. Am J
    domains for quality improvement in emergency general surgery. Surg 216:856–862
    Surgery 163:832–838                                       42. American College of Surgeons (2012) User Guide for the 2011
 23. Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Bilimoria KY et al (2010) Com-       Participant Use Data File.https://www.facs.org/-/media/ﬁles/
    parison of hospital performance in nonemergency versus       quality-programs/nsqip/ug11.ashx Accessed 11/17/2020
    emergency colorectal operations at 142 hospitals. J Am Coll 43. The NCEPOD Classiﬁcation of Intervention (2004) In: National
    Surg 210:155–165                                             Conﬁdential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death. https://
 24. Ingraham AM, Ayturk MD, Kiefe CI, Santry HP   (2019)        www.ncepod.org.uk/classiﬁcation.html. Accessed 20 Aug 2019
    Adherence to 20 emergency general surgery best practices: 44. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M et al (2019) Guidelines for
    results of a national survey. Ann Surg 270:270–280           perioperative care in elective colorectal surgery: enhanced
 25. Daniel VT, Ingraham AM, Khubchandani JA  et al (2019)       recovery after surgery (ERASÒ) society recommendations:
    Variations in the delivery of emergency general surgery care in 2018. World J Surg 37:259–284. https://doi.org/10.1007/
    the era of acute care surgery. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf    s00268-018-4844-y
    45:14–23                                                  45. Poulton T, Murray D, The National Emergency Laparotomy
 26. Oliver CM, Bassett MG, Poulton TE et al (2018) Organisational Audit (NELA) project team (2019) Pre-optimisation of patients
    factors and mortality after an emergency laparotomy: multilevel undergoing emergency laparotomy: a review of best practice.
    analysis of 39 903 National Emergency Laparotomy Audit       Anaesthesia 74:100–107
    patients. Br J Anaesth 121:1346–1356                      46. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W et al (2017) Surviving sepsis
 27. Symons NRA, Moorthy K, Vincent CA, London Surgical          campaign: international guidelines for management of sepsis
    Research Group (2016) Reliability in the process of care during and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med 43:304–377
    emergency general surgical admission: a prospective cohort 47. Sethi A, Debbarma M, Narang N et al (2018) Impact of targeted
    study. Int J Surg 32:143–149                                 preoperative optimization on clinical outcome in emergency
 28. Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Raval MV et al (2011) Variation in   abdominal surgeries: a prospective randomized trial. Anesth
    quality of care after emergency general surgery procedures in Essays Res 12:149–154
    the elderly. J Am Coll Surg 212:1039–1048                 48. El Hechi MW, Lee JM, Naar L et al (2020) The effect of
 29. Tengberg LT, Bay-Nielsen M, Bisgaard T et al (2017) Mul-    immunosuppression on emergency colectomy outcomes: a
    tidisciplinary perioperative protocol in patients undergoing nationwide retrospective analysis. World J Surg 44:1637–1647.
    acute high-risk abdominal surgery. Br J Surg 104:463–471     https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-020-05378-5
 30. Peden C, Scott MJ (2015) Anesthesia for emergency abdominal 49. NICE Short Clinical Guidelines Technical Team (2006) Acutely
    surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 33:209–221                         ill patients in hospital: recognition of and response to acute
 31. Gale SC, Shaﬁ S, Dombrovskiy VY et al (2014) The public     illness in adults in hospital. London: National Institute for
    health burden of emergency general surgery in the United     Health and Clinical Excellence. https://www.nice.org.uk/gui
    States: a 10-year analysis of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample– dance/cg50/evidence/full-guideline-pdf-195219037 Accessed
    2001 to 2010. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 77:202–208            11/17/2020
 32. Scott JW, Olufajo OA, Brat GA et al (2016) Use of national 50. Kovacs C, Jarvis SW, Prytherch DR et al (2016) Comparison of
    burden to deﬁne operative emergency general surgery. JAMA    the national early warning score in non-elective medical and
    Surg 151:e160480                                             surgical patients. Br J Surg 103:1385–1393
 33. Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Raval MV et al (2011) Comparison  51. Churpek MM, Snyder A, Han X et al (2017) Quick sepsis-
    of hospital performance in emergency versus elective general related organ failure assessment, systemic inﬂammatory
    surgery operations at 198 hospitals. J Am Coll Surg 212:20-  response syndrome, and early warning scores for detecting
    28.e1                                                        clinical deterioration in infected patients outside the intensive
 34. Cooper Z, Mitchell SL, Gorges RJ et al (2015) Predictors of care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 195:906–911
    mortality up to 1 year after emergency major abdominal surgery 52. Garcea G, Ganga R, Neal CP et al (2010) Preoperative early
    in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 63:2572–2579               warning scores can predict in-hospital mortality and critical care
                                                                 admission following emergency  surgery. J  Surg  Res
                                                                 159:729–734

                                                                                                            123


1288                                                                                    World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

 53. UK National Surgical Research Collaborative (2017) Multi- 72. Acute non localized abdominal pain. ACR Appropriateness Cri-
    centre observational study of adherence to Sepsis Six guidelines teria (2018) In: American College of Radiologists. https://acsearch.
    in emergency general surgery. Br J Surg 104:e165–e171        acr.org/docs/69467/Narrative/ Accessed December 1st 2020
 54. Becher RD, Hoth JJ, Miller PR et al (2012) Systemic inﬂam- 73. De Simone B, Ansaloni L, Sartelli M et al (2018) Is the risk of
    mation worsens outcomes in emergency  surgical patients.     contrast-induced nephropathy a real contraindication to perform
    J Trauma Acute Care Surg 72:1140–1149                        intravenous contrast enhanced computed tomography for non-
 55. Moore LJ, Moore FA, Todd SR et al (2010) Sepsis in general  traumatic acute abdomen in emergency surgery department?
    surgery: the 2005–2007 national surgical quality improvement Acta Biomed 89:158–172
    program perspective. Arch Surg 145:695–700                74. Ellis JH, Khalatbari S, Yosef M et al (2019) Inﬂuence of clinical
 56. Moore LJ, Moore FA, Jones SL et al (2009) Sepsis in general factors on risk of contrast-induced nephrotoxicity from IV iod-
    surgery: a deadly complication. Am J Surg 198:868–874        inated low-osmolality contrast material in patients with a low
 57. Boyd-Carson H, Doleman B, Cromwell D et al (2020) Delay in  estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. AJR Am J Roentgenol
    source control in perforated peptic ulcer leads to 6% increased 213:W188–W193
    risk of death per hour: a nationwide cohort study. World J Surg 75. Wang DC, Parry CR, Feldman M et al (2015) Acute abdomen in
    44:869–875. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-019-05254-x       the emergency department: is CT a time-limiting factor? AJR
 58. Kumar A, Roberts D, Wood KE et al (2006) Duration of        Am J Roentgenol 205:1222–1229
    hypotension before initiation of effective antimicrobial therapy 76. Moonesinghe SR, Mythen MG, Das P et al (2013) Risk strati-
    is the critical determinant of survival in human septic shock. Crit ﬁcation tools for predicting morbidity and mortality in adult
    Care Med 34:1589–1596                                        patients undergoing major surgery: qualitative systematic
 59. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW et al (2016) The third  review. Anesthesiology 119:959–981
    international consensus deﬁnitions for sepsis and septic shock 77. Prytherch DR, Whiteley MS, Higgins B et al (1998) POSSUM
    (Sepsis-3). JAMA 315:801–810                                 and portsmouth POSSUM for predicting mortality. physiologi-
 60. Villegas N, Moore LJ (2018) Sepsis screening: current evidence cal and operative severity score for the enumeration of mortality
    and available tools. Surg Infect 19:126–130                  and morbidity. Br J Surg 85:1217–1220
 61. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2017) 78. Haskins IN, Maluso PJ, Schroeder ME et al (2017) A calculator
    Algorithm for managing suspected sepsis in adults and young  for mortality following emergency general surgery based on the
    people aged 18 years and over in an acute hospital setting. In: American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
    Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis, and early management. https:// Improvement Program database. J Trauma Acute Care Surg
    www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/resources. Accessed 8 Aug      82:1094–1099
    2019                                                      79. Eugene N, Oliver CM, Bassett MG et al (2018) Development
 62. Daniels R, Nutbeam T, McNamara G, Galvin C (2011) The       and internal validation of a novel risk adjustment model for
    sepsis six and the severe sepsis resuscitation bundle: a     adult patients undergoing emergency laparotomy surgery: the
    prospective observational cohort study. Emerg Med   J        National Emergency Laparotomy Audit risk model. Br J
    28:507–512                                                   Anaesth 121:739–748
 63. Levy MM, Evans LE, Rhodes A (2018) The surviving sepsis  80. Stonelake S, Thomson P, Suggett N (2015) Identiﬁcation of the
    campaign bundle: 2018 update. Crit Care Med 46:997–1000      high risk emergency surgical patient: which risk prediction
 64. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC et al (2017) Time to      model should be used? Ann Med Surg (Lond) 4:240–247
    treatment and mortality during mandated emergency care for 81. Barazanchi A, Bhat S, Palmer-Neels K et al (2020) Evaluating
    sepsis. N Engl J Med 376:2235–2244                           and improving current risk prediction tools in emergency
 65. Buck DL, Vester-Andersen M, Møller MH (2013) Surgical       laparotomy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 89(2):382–387
    delay is a critical determinant of survival in perforated peptic 82. Martin GP, Kocman D, Stephens T et al (2017) Pathways to
    ulcer. Br J Surg 100:1045–1049                               professionalism? Quality improvement, care pathways, and the
 66. Azuhata T, Kinoshita K, Kawano D et al (2014) Time from     interplay of standardisation and clinical autonomy. Sociol
    admission to initiation of surgery for source control is a critical Health Illn 39:1314–1329
    determinant of survival in patients with gastrointestinal perfo- 83. Alvarez-Nebreda ML, Bentov N, Urman RD et al (2018) Rec-
    ration with associated septic shock. Crit Care 18:R87        ommendations for preoperative management of frailty from the
 67. Vester-Andersen M, Lundstrøm LH, Buck DL, Møller MH         Society for Perioperative Assessment and Quality Improvement
    (2016) Association between surgical delay and survival in high- (SPAQI). J Clin Anesth 47:33–42
    risk emergency abdominal surgery. a population-based Danish 84. McIsaac DI, Moloo H, Bryson GL, van Walraven C (2017) The
    cohort study. Scand J Gastroenterol 51:121–128               association of frailty with outcomes and resource use after
 68. Peacock O, Bassett MG, Kuryba A et al (2018) Thirty-day     emergency general surgery: a population-based cohort study.
    mortality in patients undergoing laparotomy for small bowel  Anesth Analg 124:1653–1661
    obstruction. Br J Surg 105:1006–1013                      85. Akyar S, Armenia SJ, Ratnani P, Merchant AM (2018) The
 69. Bloos F, Thomas-Ru¨ddel D, Ru¨ddel H et al (2014) Impact of impact of frailty on postoperative cardiopulmonary complica-
    compliance with infection management guidelines on outcome   tions in the emergency general surgery population. Surg J (N Y)
    in patients with severe sepsis: a prospective observational multi- 4:e66–e77
    center study. Crit Care 18:R42                            86. Parmar KL, Law J, Carter B et al (2019) Frailty in older patients
 70. Royal College of Surgeons England, Department of Health     undergoing emergency laparotomy: results from the UK obser-
    (2018) The high-risk general surgical patient: raising the stan- vational Emergency Laparotomy and Frailty (ELF) Study. Ann
    dard. https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/news-and-events/media-centre/ Surg. https://doi.org/10.1097/SLA.0000000000003402
    press-releases/high-risk-general-surgical/. Accessed 03/01/2021 87. Tan HL, Chia STX, Nadkarni NV et al (2019) Frailty and
 71. The Royal College of Surgeons England and Department of     functional decline after emergency abdominal surgery in the
    Health (2011) The Higher Risk General Surgical Patient:      elderly: a prospective cohort study. World J Emerg Surg 14:62
    Towards Improved Care for a Forgotten Group. https://www. 88. Joseph B, Zangbar B, Pandit V et al (2016) Emergency general
    rcseng.ac.uk/library-and-publications/rcs-publications/docs/the- surgery in the elderly: too old or too frail? J Am Coll Surg
    higher-risk-general-surgical-patient/ Accessed 11/17/2020    222:805–813

123


World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290                                                                                 1289

 89. Murphy PB, Savage SA, Zarzaur BL (2020) Impact of patient 106. American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel on Postoperative
    frailty on morbidity and mortality after common emergency    Delirium in Older Adults (2015) American Geriatrics Society
    general surgery operations. J Surg Res 247:95–102            abstracted clinical practice guideline for postoperative delirium
 90. Desserud KF, Veen T, Søreide K (2016) Emergency general     in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 63:142–150
    surgery in the geriatric patient. Br J Surg 103:e52-61   107. Sprung J, Roberts RO, Weingarten TN et al (2017) Postopera-
 91. Vilches-Moraga A, Rowley M, Fox J et al (2020) Emergency    tive delirium in elderly patients is associated with subsequent
    laparotomy in the older patient: factors predictive of 12-month cognitive impairment. Br J Anaesth 119:316–323
    mortality—Salford-POPS-GS An observational study. Aging  108. Gleason LJ, Schmitt EM, Kosar CM et al (2015) Effect of
    Clin Exp Res. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40520-020-01578-0     delirium and other major complications on outcomes after
 92. Lee KC, Streid J, Sturgeon D et al (2020) The impact of frailty elective surgery in older adults. JAMA Surg 150:1134–1140
    on long-term patient-oriented outcomes after emergency general 109. Hshieh TT, Yue J, Oh E et al (2015) Effectiveness of multi-
    surgery: a retrospective cohort study. J Am Geriatr Soc      component nonpharmacological delirium interventions: a meta-
    68:1037–1043                                                 analysis. JAMA Intern Med 175:512–520
 93. Eamer G, Taheri A, Chen SS et al (2018) Comprehensive   110. Chen CC-H, Li H-C, Liang J-T et al (2017) Effect of a modiﬁed
    geriatric assessment for older people admitted to a surgical hospital elder life program on delirium and length of hospital
    service. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD012485               stay in patients undergoing abdominal surgery: a cluster ran-
 94. Engelhardt KE, Reuter Q, Liu J et al (2018) Frailty screening domized clinical trial. JAMA Surg 152:827–834
    and a frailty pathway decrease length of stay, loss of indepen- 111. The 2019 American Geriatrics Society Beers CriteriaÒ Update
    dence, and 30-day readmission rates in frail geriatric trauma and Expert Panel (2019) American Geriatrics Society 2019 Updated
    emergency general surgery patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg AGS Beers CriteriaÒ for potentially inappropriate medication
    85:167–173                                                   use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 67:674–694
 95. Khadaroo RG, Warkentin LM, Wagg AS et al (2020) Clinical 112. Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP et al (2012) American
    effectiveness of the elder-friendly approaches to the surgical College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
    environment initiative in emergency general surgery. JAMA    Program; American Geriatrics Society. optimal preoperative
    Surg 155:e196021                                             assessment of the geriatric surgical patient: a best practices
 96. Aitken RM, Partridge JSL, Oliver CM et al (2020) Older      guideline from the American College of Surgeons National
    patients undergoing emergency laparotomy: observations from  Surgical Quality Improvement Program and the American
    the National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) years 1–4.    Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg 215:453–466
    Age Ageing. https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afaa075       113. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) (2019) Risk
 97. Eamer GJ, Clement F, Holroyd-Leduc J et al (2019) Frailty   reduction and management of delirium: A national clinical
    predicts increased costs in emergent general surgery patients: a guideline. Edinburgh, Scotland. https://www.sign.ac.uk/our-
    prospective cohort cost analysis. Surgery 166:82–87          guidelines/risk-reduction-and-management-of-delirium/ Acces-
 98. Hofmeister M, Khadaroo RG, Holroyd-Leduc J et al (2020)     sed 11/17/2020
    Cost-effectiveness Analysis of the Elder-Friendly Approaches to 114. Levi M, Opal SM (2006) Coagulation abnormalities in critically
    the Surgical Environment (EASE) intervention for emergency   ill patients. Crit Care 10:222
    abdominal surgical care of adults aged 65 years and older. 115. Scarborough JE, Schumacher J, Pappas TN et al (2016) Which
    JAMA Netw Open 3:e202034                                     complications matter most? Prioritizing quality improvement in
 99. Saravana-Bawan B, Warkentin LM, Rucker D et al (2019)       emergency general surgery. J Am Coll Surg 222:515–524
    Incidence and predictors of postoperative delirium in the older 116. McCoy CC, Englum BR, Keenan JE et al (2015) Impact of
    acute care surgery population: a prospective study. Can J Surg speciﬁc postoperative complications on the outcomes of emer-
    62:33–38                                                     gency general surgery patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg
100. de Castro SMM, U¨ nlu¨ C¸ , Tuynman JB et al (2014) Incidence 78:912–918 (Discussion 918–9)
    and risk factors of delirium in the elderly general surgical 117. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA et al (2012) Peri-
    patient. Am J Surg 208:26–32                                 operative management of antithrombotic therapy: antithrom-
101. Saljuqi AT, Hanna K, Asmar S et al (2020) Prospective evalu- botic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American
    ation of delirium in geriatric patients undergoing emergency College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
    general surgery. J Am Coll Surg 230:758–765                  Guidelines. Chest 141:e326S-e350S
102. Culley DJ, Flaherty D, Fahey MC et al (2017) Poor performance 118. Baron TH, Kamath PS, McBane RD (2013) Management of
    on a preoperative cognitive screening test predicts postoperative antithrombotic therapy in patients undergoing invasive proce-
    complications in older orthopedic surgical patients. Anesthesi- dures. N Engl J Med 368:2113–2124
    ology 127:765–774                                        119. Douketis JD, Johnson JA, Turpie AG (2004) Low-molecular-
103. Berger M, Schenning KJ, Brown CH 4th et al (2018) Best      weight heparin as bridging anticoagulation during interruption
    practices for postoperative brain health: recommendations from of warfarin: assessment of a standardized periprocedural anti-
    the ﬁfth international perioperative neurotoxicity working   coagulation regimen. Arch Intern Med 164:1319–1326
    group. Anesth Analg 127:1406–1413                        120. Barnes GD, Lucas E, Alexander GC, Goldberger ZD (2015)
104. Mohanty S, Rosenthal RA, Russell MM et al (2016) Optimal    National trends in ambulatory oral anticoagulant use. Am J Med
    perioperative management of the geriatric patient: a best prac- 128:1300–5.e2
    tices guideline from the American College of Surgeons NSQIP 121. Hornor MA, Duane TM, Ehlers AP et al (2018) American
    and  the American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg         College of Surgeons’ guidelines for the perioperative manage-
    222:930–947                                                  ment of antithrombotic medication. J Am Coll Surg 227:521-
105. Arias F, Wiggins M, Urman RD et al (2020) Rapid in-person   536.e1
    cognitive screening in the preoperative setting: test considera- 122. Keeling D, Tait RC, Watson H, B Committee of Standards for
    tions and recommendations from the Society for Perioperative Haematology (2016) Peri-operative management of anticoagu-
    Assessment and Quality Improvement (SPAQI). J Clin Anesth    lation and antiplatelet therapy. Br J Haematol 175:602–613
    62:109724                                                123. Tran H, Joseph J, Young L et al (2014) New oral anticoagulants:
                                                                 a practical guide on prescription, laboratory testing and peri-

                                                                                                            123


1290                                                                                    World J Surg (2021) 45:1272–1290

    procedural/bleeding management. Australasian Society of      the surgical care and outcomes assessment program. Ann Surg
    Thrombosis and Haemostasis. Intern Med J 44:525–536          257:8–14
124. Kozek-Langenecker SA, Ahmed AB, Afshari A et al (2017)  140. NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Liu B et al (2012)
    Management of severe perioperative bleeding: guidelines from Hypoglycemia and risk of death in critically ill patients. N Engl
    the European Society of Anaesthesiology: ﬁrst update 2016. Eur J Med 367:1108–1118
    J Anaesthesiol 34:332–395                                141. Yatabe T, Inoue S, Sakaguchi M, Egi M (2017) The optimal
125. Godier A, Garrigue D, Lasne D et al (2019) Management of    target for acute glycemic control in critically ill patients: a
    antiplatelet therapy for non elective invasive procedures of network meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med 43:16–28
    bleeding complications: proposals from the French working 142. Alghamdi AA, Al-Radi OO, Latter DA (2005) Intravenous
    group on perioperative haemostasis (GIHP), in collaboration  magnesium for prevention of atrial ﬁbrillation after coronary
    with the French Society of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care    artery bypass surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
    Medicine (SFAR). Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38:289–302       J Card Surg 20:293–299
126. Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, Eikelboom J et al (2015) Idaru- 143. Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B (2007) Prophylactic nasogastric
    cizumab for dabigatran reversal. N Engl J Med 373:511–520    decompression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database
127. Siegal DM, Curnutte JT, Connolly SJ et al (2015) Andex-     Syst Rev 18(3):CD004929
    anet alfa for the reversal of factor Xa inhibitor activity. N Engl J 144. Rao W, Zhang X, Zhang J et al (2011) The role of nasogastric
    Med 373:2413–2424                                            tube in decompression after elective colon and rectum surgery: a
128. Vilahur G, Choi BG, Zafar MU et al (2007) Normalization of  meta-analysis. Int J Colorectal Dis 26:423–429
    platelet reactivity in clopidogrel-treated subjects. J Thromb 145. Jottard K, Hoff C, Maessen J et al (2009) Life and death of the
    Haemost 5:82–90                                              nasogastric tube in elective colonic surgery in the Netherlands.
129. Burger W, Chemnitius J-M, Kneissl GD, Ru¨cker G (2005) Low- Clin Nutr 28:26–28
    dose aspirin for secondary cardiovascular prevention—cardio- 146. Ronco M, Iona L, Fabbro C et al (2012) Patient education
    vascular risks after its perioperative withdrawal versus bleeding outcomes in surgery: a systematic review from 2004 to 2010. Int
    risks with its continuation—review and meta-analysis. J Intern J Evid Based Healthc 10:309–323
    Med 257:399–414                                          147. Ayyadhah Alanazi A (2014) Reducing anxiety in preoperative
130. Columbo JA, Lambour AJ, Sundling RA et al (2018) A meta-    patients: a systematic review. Br J Nurs 23:387–393
    analysis of the impact of aspirin, clopidogrel, and dual anti- 148. Hounsome J, Lee A, Greenhalgh J et al (2017) A systematic
    platelet therapy on bleeding complications in noncardiac sur- review of information format and timing before scheduled adult
    gery. Ann Surg 267:1–10                                      surgery for peri-operative anxiety. Anaesthesia 72:1265–1272
131. Murphy PB, Vogt KN, Lau BD et al (2018) Venous throm-   149. Cooper Z, Courtwright A, Karlage A et al (2014) Pitfalls in
    boembolism prevention in emergency general surgery: a review. communication that lead to nonbeneﬁcial emergency surgery in
    JAMA Surg 153:479–486                                        elderly patients with serious illness: description of the problem
132. Ross SW, Kuhlenschmidt KM, Kubasiak JC  et al (2020)        and elements of a solution. Ann Surg 260:949–957
    Association of the risk of a venous thromboembolic event in 150. Taylor LJ, Nabozny MJ, Steffens NM et al (2017) A framework
    emergency vs elective general surgery. JAMA Surg. https://doi. to improve surgeon communication in high-stakes surgical
    org/10.1001/jamasurg.2020.0433                               decisions: best case/worst case. JAMA Surg 152:531–538
133. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2018) 151. Morris RS, Ruck JM, Conca-Cheng AM et al (2018) Shared
    Venous Thromboembolism  in over 16s: reducing the risk of    decision-making in acute surgical illness: the surgeon’s per-
    hospital-acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. spective. J Am Coll Surg 226:784–795
    NICE   guideline [NG89]. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ 152. Stacey D, Le´gare´ F, Lewis K et al (2017) Decision aids for
    ng89 Accessed 11/17/2020                                     people facing health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane
134. Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ et al (2012) Antithrombotic   Database Syst Rev. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858
    therapy for VTE disease: antithrombotic therapy and prevention 153. (2020) Choosing Wisely UK. https://www.choosingwisely.co.
    of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians  uk/about-choosing-wisely-uk/. Accessed 24 Jun 2020
    Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 141:e419S- 154. Berian JR, Mohanty S, Ko CY et al (2016) Association of loss of
    e496S                                                        independence with readmission and death after discharge in
135. Hu QL, Grant MC, Hornor MA, et al (2020) Technical evidence older patients after surgical procedures. JAMA  Surg
    review for emergency major abdominal operation conducted for 151:e161689–e161689
    the agency for healthcare research and quality safety program 155. Cooper Z, Koritsanszky LA, Cauley CE et al (2016) Recom-
    for improving surgical care and recovery. J Am Coll Surg     mendations for best communication practices to facilitate goal-
    23:S1072–7515(20)32338–3.                                    concordant care for seriously ill older patients with emergency
136. Ban KA, Gibbons MM, Ko CY et al (2019) Evidence review      surgical conditions. Ann Surg 263:1–6
    conducted for the agency for healthcare research and quality 156. Taylor LJ, Johnson SK, Nabozny MJ et al (2018) Barriers to
    safety program for improving surgical care and recovery: focus goal-concordant care for older patients with acute surgical ill-
    on  anesthesiology for colorectal surgery. Anesth Analg      ness. Ann Surg 267:677–682
    128:879–889                                              157. Jones CH, O’Neill S, McLean KA et al (2017) Patient experi-
137. Duggan EW, Carlson K, Umpierrez GE (2017) Perioperative     ence and overall satisfaction after emergency abdominal sur-
    hyperglycemia management:  an   update. Anesthesiology       gery. BMC Surg 17:76
    126:547–560                                              158. Kwong E, Neuburger J, Murray D, Black N (2018) Feasibility of
138. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Jacobs S et al (2011) Randomized    collecting and assessing patient-reported outcomes for emer-
    study of basal-bolus insulin therapy in the inpatient management gency admissions: laparotomy for gastrointestinal conditions.
    of patients with type 2 diabetes undergoing general surgery  BMJ Open Gastroenterol 5:e000238
    (RABBIT 2 surgery). Diabetes Care 34:256–261
139. Kwon S, Thompson R, Dellinger P et al (2013) Importance of Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
    perioperative glycemic control in general surgery: a report from jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

123



