ajog.org                                                                            Special Reports
Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean
delivery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society
Recommendations (Part 2)
Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD; Stephen L. Wood, MD; George A. Macones, MD;
Ian J. Wrench, MB ChB, PhD; Jeffrey Huang, MD; Mikael Norman, MD, PhD;
Karin Pettersson, MD, PhD; William J. Fawcett, MBBS, FRCA, FFPMRCA;
Medhat M. Shalabi, MD; Amy Metcalfe, PhD; Leah Gramlich, MD; Gregg Nelson, MD, PhD;
R. Douglas Wilson, MD, MSc

    nhanced Recovery After Surgery
E   (ERAS) is a standardized, periop- The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society guideline for intraoperative care in cesarean
erative care program  that now  is    delivery will provide best practice, evidenced-based, recommendations for intraoperative
embedded ﬁrmly within multiple surgi- care, with primarily a maternal focus. The “focused” pathway process for scheduled and
cal disciplines that include colorectal, unscheduled cesarean delivery for this Enhanced Recovery After Surgery cesarean delivery
urologic, gynecologic, and hepatobiliary guideline will consider procedure from the decision to operate (starting with the 30e60
surgery.1 ERAS has been shown to result minutes before skin incision) through the surgery. The literature search (1966e2017) used
in both clinical beneﬁts (reductions in Embase and PubMed to search medical subject headings including “cesarean section,”
length of stay, complications, and read- “cesarean section,” “cesarean section delivery,” and all pre- and intraoperative Enhanced
missions) and health system beneﬁts   Recovery After Surgery items. Study selection allowed titles and abstracts to be screened by
(reduction in cost).1,2               individual reviewers to identify potentially relevant articles. Metaanalyses, systematic reviews,
                                      randomized controlled studies, nonrandomized controlled studies, reviews, and case series
                                      were considered for each individual topic. Quality assessment and data analyses evaluated
                                      the quality of evidence and recommendations were evaluated according to the Grading of
                                      Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation system as used and described
From the Department of Obstetrics &   in previous Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society guidelines. The Enhanced Recovery
Gynecology, Oregon Health & Science   After Surgery cesarean delivery guideline/pathway has created a maternal focused pathway
University, Portland, OR (Dr Caughey); the                                    e
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, (for scheduled and unscheduled surgery starting from 30 60 minutes before skin incision to
Cumming School of Medicine, University of maternal discharge) with Enhanced Recovery After Surgeryedirected preoperative elements,
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (Drs Wood, intraoperative elements, and postoperative elements. Speciﬁcs of the intraoperative care
Metcalfe, Nelson, and Wilson); the Department included the use of prophylactic antibiotics before the cesarean delivery, appropriate patient
of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Washington warming intraoperatively, blunt expansion of the transverse uterine hysterotomy, skin closure
University in St Louis, St. Louis, MO (Dr with subcuticular sutures, and delayed cord clamping. A number of speciﬁc elements of
Macones); the Shefﬁeld Teaching Hospitals
                                      intraoperative care of women who undergo cesarean delivery are recommended based on the
Trust, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Glossop
Road, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom (Dr Wrench); evidence. The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society guideline for intraoperative care in
the University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL (Dr cesarean delivery will provide best practice, evidenced-based, recommendations for intra-
Huang); the Divisions of Pediatrics (Dr Norman) operative care with primarily a maternal focus. When the cesarean delivery pathway (ele-
and Obstetrics (Dr Pettersson), Department of ments/processes) is studied, implemented, audited, evaluated, and optimized by maternity
Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, care teams, this will create an opportunity for the focused and optimized areas of care and
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; the recommendations to be further enhanced.
Department of Anaesthesia, Royal Surrey
County Hospital, Egerton Road, Guildford,
United Kingdom (Mr Fawcett); the Departments Key words: cesarean delivery, enhanced recovery
of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Alzahra
Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates (Dr
Shalabi); the Department of Medicine, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (Dr The intent is for this ERAS Society recommendations for the surgical
Gramlich).                          guideline for perioperative care in cesar- pathway related to cesarean delivery with
Received June 26, 2018; accepted Aug. 1, ean delivery to provide best practice primarily a maternal focus. The current
2018.                               recommendations  for  preoperative, document is the second in a series of 3 to
The authors report no conﬂict of interest. intraoperative, and postoperative phases focus on ERAS CD and is focused pri-
Corresponding author: R. Douglas Wilson, MD, primarily. Although certain ERAS prin- marily on intraoperative care beginning
MSc. doug.wilson@ahs.ca             ciples have been established for other 30e60 minutes before the procedure,
0002-9378/$36.00                    abdominal/pelvic surgeries, this present with the ﬁrst document focused on
ª 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2018.08.006 ERAS cesarean delivery (ERAS CD) preoperative care and the third docu-
                                    pathway will provide evidence-based ment focused on postoperative care. The

                                                          DECEMBER 2018 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 533


Special Reports                                                                                  ajog.org

                                                                        Guidelines.3,4 Brieﬂy, recommendations
                           AJOG at a Glance
                                                                        are given as follows: Strong recommen-
                                                                                                       ﬁ
  Why was this study conducted?                                         dations indicate that the panel is con -
  This Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society guideline was created to support dent that the desirable effects of
  the most common surgical procedure in the industrialized healthcare world: the adherence to a recommendation
  cesarean delivery. It has the goal to enhance the quality and safety of the cesarean outweigh the undesirable effects. Weak
  delivery for improved maternal and fetal/neonatal outcomes through evaluation recommendations indicate that the
  and audit.                                                            desirable effects of adherence to a
                                                                        recommendation probably outweigh the
  Key ﬁndings                                                           undesirable effects, but the panel is less
  The broad Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society cesarean delivery elements conﬁdent (Table 2). Recommendations
  and recommendations (parts 1e3) break down the surgical delivery process into are based on the quality of evidence:
  a “focused” pathway that starts at 30e60 minutes before skin incision, for both high, moderate, low, and very low, but
  scheduled and unscheduled cesarean deliveries, until hospital discharge along also on the balance between desirable
  with a longer “optimized” pathway that manages antenatal education, maternal and undesirable effects. In some cases,
  comorbidities, and immediate neonatal needs at delivery. The intraoperative strong recommendations may be
  section (Part 2) focuses on the time immediately prior to beginning the surgery reached from low-quality data and vice
  including prophylactic antibiotics, through the cesarean surgery, to the imme- versa. The core ERAS CD team (A.B.C.,
  diate newborn care.                                                   G.A.M., S.L.W., G.N., and R.D.W.)
                                                                        reviewed the evidence in detail for each
  What does this add to what is known?                                  section and assigned both the recom-
  This Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society cesarean delivery guideline has mendation and evidence level. Discrep-
  taken the evidence-based knowledge created from the cesarean delivery research ancies were resolved by the lead author
  and has critically and with consensus published the information in a 3-part (A.B.C.) and senior author (R.D.W.).
  guideline that uses the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society principles and
  process for improved surgical quality and safety for obstetric surgical deliveries. Results
                                                                        The cesarean delivery pathway and el-
                                                                        ements have a wide scope for maternal
“focused” pathway process for scheduled the topics were agreed on, they were then antenatal, delivery, and postoperative
and unscheduled ERAS CD   has been  allocated among the group according natal care. The focus of this document
created for this ERAS CD guideline from to expertise. The literature search is on a focused pathway that starts
“decision to operate (30 - 60 minutes (1966e2017) used Embase and PubMed 30e60 minutes before cesarean inci-
before  skin incision) to  hospital to search medical subject headings  sion to maternal (fetal) discharge,
discharge.”                         including “cesarean section”, “cesarean which allows for a more consistent and
  Ultimately, ERAS is a tool for process delivery”, “cesarean section delivery” and generalizable ERAS CD process that
management that creates a focused care all intraoperative ERAS items (Table 1). includes the same comprehensive care
process. The tool should be used in a Reference lists of all eligible articles were to both unscheduled and scheduled
cycle of audit and feedback, whereby crosschecked for other relevant studies. cesarean delivery.
clinicians are provided with comparative
data to educate, change, and decrease the Study selection               Intraoperative cesarean delivery
“harmful” clinical variances that are Titles and abstracts were screened pathway (focused elements)
identiﬁed in certain high-volume clinical by individual reviewers to identify Preoperative antimicrobial prophylaxis
care processes and procedures that will potentially relevant articles. Meta- and skin preparation (focused element)
increase quality of care, patient safety, analyses, systematic reviews, random- A cesarean delivery performed before
and health outcomes.                ized controlled studies, nonrandomized rupture of the membranes and without
                                    controlled studies, reviews, and case se- chorioamnionitis usually will be
Methods                             ries were considered for each individual considered a clean (class I) incision.
Literature search                   topic.                              However, a cesarean delivery in the
The author group was selected by the                                    setting of ruptured membranes, partic-
ERAS   Society in May  2017  based  Quality assessment and data analyses ularly in active phase of labor or second
on expertise in the area, and a consensus The quality of evidence and recom- stage of labor or with chorioamnionitis,
topic list was determined. The ERAS mendations were evaluated according to usually is classiﬁed as a clean contami-
Gynecologic/Oncology   guidelines3,4 the Grading of  Recommendations,   nated (class II) incision. There could be
were  used  as  templates; however, Assessment, Development and Evalua- an argument made that, at least, some of
several other elements unique to cesar- tion (GRADE) system5 as used and these latter incisions are contaminated
ean section delivery were added. After described in  previous   ERAS    (class III) incisions. Regardless, all are at

534  American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018


ajog.org                                                                                        Special Reports


   TABLE 1
   Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society
   recommendations
                                                                                        Evidence      Recommendation
   Item                                Recommendation                                   level         grade
   Intraoperative pathway focused:     1. Intravenous antibiotics should be administered routinely High Strong
   preoperative antimicrobial prophylaxis and within 60 min before the cesarean delivery skin incision.
   skin preparation (focused elements) In all women, a ﬁrst-generation cephalosporin is
                                       recommended; in women in labor or with ruptured
                                       membranes, the addition of azithromycin confers
                                       additional reduction in postoperative infections.
                                       2. Chlorhexidine-alcohol is preferred to aqueous Low           Strong
                                       povidone-iodine solution for abdominal skin
                                       cleansing before cesarean delivery.
                                       3. Vaginal preparation with povidine-iodine solution should Moderate Weak
                                       be considered for the reduction of postcesarean infections.
   Intraoperative pathway focused
     Pre- and intraoperative anesthetic 1. Regional anesthesia is the preferred method of Low         Strong
     management (focused element)      anesthesia for cesarean delivery as part of an
                                       enhanced recovery protocol.
     Prevention of intraoperative hypothermia 1. Appropriate patient monitoring is needed to apply Low Strong
     (focused element)                 warming devices and avoid hypothermia.
                                       2. Forced air warming, intravenous ﬂuid warming, High          Strong
                                       and increasing operating room temperature are all
                                       recommended to prevent hypothermia during
                                       cesarean delivery.
     Cesarean delivery surgical techniques/ 1. Blunt expansion of a transverse uterine hysterotomy Moderate Weak
     considerations (focused element)  at time of cesarean delivery is recommended to reduce
                                       surgical blood loss.
                                       2. Closure of the hysterotomy in 2 layers may be Low           Weak
                                       associated with a lower rate of uterine rupture.
                                       3. The peritoneum does not need to be closed because Low       Weak
                                       closure is not associated with improved outcomes and
                                       increases operative times.
                                       4. In women with  2 cm of subcutaneous tissue,   Moderate      Weak
                                       reapproximation of that tissue layer should be performed.
                                       5. The skin closure should be closed with subcuticular Moderate Weak
                                       suture in most cases, because of evidence of reduced
                                       wound separation in those women whose staples were
                                       removed  4 days postoperatively.
     Perioperative ﬂuid management (focused 1. Perioperative and intraoperative euvolemia are Low-    Strong
     element)                          important factors in patient perioperative care and moderate
                                       appear to lead to improved maternal and neonatal
                                       outcomes after cesarean delivery.

   Caughey. Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018.               (continued)

an increased risk of postoperative infec- the primary issues when considering     similar beneﬁts have been seen with
tion  and  have demonstrated    beneﬁt   prophylactic antibiotics, wound prepa-   other antibiotic regimens.6 Historically,
from prophylactic antibiotics and other  ration, and vaginal preparation.         because of concerns of fetal exposure,
interventions. Although the class I in-    For   cesarean  delivery  performed    these antibiotics were often given after
cisions will be predominantly at-risk    before rupture of the membranes, the     cord clamping. However, because of the
from abdominal skin   ﬂora, the class II standard of care has been to use a rela- beneﬁt of a decrease in    subsequent
or class III incisions both carry the risk of tively narrow-spectrum ﬁrst-generation wound infections reported in several
skin ﬂora plus the risk of exposure from cephalosporin directed against skin ﬂora studies, it is now recommended to give
vaginal ﬂora. These microbial risks are  for  infectious prophylaxis, although    the antibiotics 30e60 minutes before the

                                                                   DECEMBER 2018 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 535


Special Reports                                                                                  ajog.org


  TABLE 1
  Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society
  recommendations  (continued)
                                                                             Evidence    Recommendation
  Item                            Recommendation                             level       grade
  Neonate pathway focused: Immediate care 1. Delayed cord clamping for at least 1 minute at a Moderate Strong
  of the newborn infant at delivery (focused term delivery is recommended.
  element)
                                  2. Delayed cord clamping for at least 30 seconds at a Low- Strong
                                  preterm delivery is recommended.           moderate
                                  3. Body temperature should be measured and Low-        Strong
                                  maintained between 36.5 C and 37.5 C after birth moderate
                                  through admission and stabilization.
                                  4. Routine suctioning of the airway or gastric aspiration Low Strong
                                  should be avoided and used only for symptoms of an
                                  obstructive airway (by secretions or meconium).
                                  5. Routine neonatal supplementation with room air is Low- Strong
                                  recommended because the use of inspired air with oxygen moderate
                                  may be associated with harm.
                                  6. In all settings that perform cesarean delivery, a capacity High Strong
                                  for immediate neonatal resuscitation is mandatory.
  Caughey. Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018.

cesarean delivery when possible.7,8 The However, in 2 recent prospective, ran- there is a wider body of literature in other
most recent Cochrane review reported a domized trials, there were no differences surgeries, the evidence is more scant in
signiﬁcant reduction in  composite  in infectious morbidity between 2-g and the setting of cesarean deliveries19: the
maternal  infectious morbidity for  3-g dosing of cephazolin.15,16 Thus, 2014 Cochrane review did not demon-
women who received preoperative pro- further evidence must be collected strate a difference.12 However, there have
phylactic antibiotics as compared with before increased dosing of prophylactic been 2 large studies since that systematic
women who received prophylactic anti- antibiotics in obese women is routinely review. One large study demonstrated a
biotics at the time of cord clamping (risk recommended.                 lower rate of wound infections with the
ratio, 0.57; 95% conﬁdence interval,  Another recent approach to antibiotic chlorhexidine-alcohol scrub.20 However,
0.45e0.72).9 There is increasing evi- prophylaxis in obese women has been another recent large, randomized trial
dence that broadening the preincision postsurgical prophylaxis. In a recent demonstrated no difference.21 Thus,
antibiotic spectrum might   further prospective, randomized trial, the risk of although the chlorhexidine-alcohol
reduce the risk of wound infections.10 In surgical site infection was reduced from usually is recommended, it is based not
a recent, multicenter trial, the addition 15.4e6.4% (P¼.01) from the use of only on the studies in cesarean deliveries
of azithromycin to the routine cephalo- cephalosporin and metronidazole versus but also on the wider body of evidence in
sporins further  reduced infectious placebo after cesarean delivery.17 How- other surgeries.22
complications from 12.0%  to 6.1%   ever, this prophylaxis regimen has not
(P<.001) and wound infections from  been compared with a preincision pro- Vaginal preparation
6.6e2.4%.11 Additionally, there have tocol that incorporates azithromycin and There is an increasing body of evidence
been studies of the use of antibiotic- requires further study.          to suggest that an antimicrobial vaginal
infused drapes without adequate evi-                                    preparation with a povidone-iodine
dence to support routine use.12     Wound preparation                   solution before cesarean delivery in
  There are special concerns for obese Even before the hospital admission for a women in labor or with rupture of
women because of their increased risk of scheduled cesarean delivery, it is recom- membranes reduces the risk of infectious
wound complications and the potential mended that women shower with an  complications. In the most  recent
of higher blood volume for the antibiotic antimicrobial soap if possible.18 The Cochrane review, the risk of endome-
distribution. In several recent studies, it Centers for Disease Control recommen- tritis was reduced from 8.3e4.3%
has been suggested that the tissue con- dations encourage the use of the (relative risk, 0. 45; 95% conﬁdence
centrations of ﬁrst-generation cephalo- chlorhexidine-alcohol scrub over the interval, 0.25e0.81).23 In stratiﬁed ana-
sporins may not be adequate from    povidone-iodine solution to prepare lyses, this was true for women both
the standard 1- or 2-g  dosing.13,14 the abdomen before surgery. Although in labor and with ruptured membranes.

536  American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018


ajog.org                                                                            Special Reports


  TABLE 2
  Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation system for rating quality of evidence
  and strength of recommendations
  Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
  Development and Evaluation          Deﬁnition
  Rating quality of evidence5: evidence level
    High quality                      Further research is unlikely to change conﬁdence in estimate of effect.
    Moderate quality                  Further research is likely to have important impact on conﬁdence in estimate of effect and may
                                      change the estimate.
    Low quality                       Further research is very likely to have important impact on conﬁdence in estimate of effect and
                                      likely to change the estimate.
    Very low quality                  Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.
  Rating strength of recommendations5:
  recommendation strength
    Strong                            When desirable effects of intervention clearly outweigh, or are outweighed by, the undesirable
                                      effects.
    Weak                              When trade-offs are less certain, either because of low-quality evidence or because evidence
                                      suggests desirable and undesirable effects are closely balanced.
  Caughey. Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018.

Summary and recommendation.         nausea and vomiting, number of days The use of intrathecal morphine results
                                    spent in hospital, and adverse events.24 in improved postoperative analgesia,34,35
1. Intravenous antibiotics should be Obstetric anesthesia regional techniques although the risk of side-effects (nausea,
   administered routinely within 60 are thought to be safer than general vomiting, and pruritis) increases with
   minutes before the cesarean delivery anesthesia and their increased adoption is the dosage used and the optimal dose is
   skin incision. In all women, a ﬁrst- thought to be 1 of the reasons that not established. Shorter acting opioids
   generation cephalosporin is recom- maternal death rates because of anes- such as fentanyl and sufentanil, when
   mended; in women in labor or with thesia have fallen.25 However, a meta- administered intrathecally, improve the
   ruptured membranes, the addition analysis of mode of anesthesia for  intraoperative but not the postoperative
   of azithromycin confers additional cesarean delivery26 reported that, other analgesia.34 In the absence of intrathecal
   reduction in postoperative infections than a higher maternal blood loss with morphine, the transversus abdominis
   (evidence level: high/recommenda- general anesthesia, there was no evidence plane ﬁeld block provides superior
   tion grade: strong).             that regional anesthesia was superior to analgesia when compared with a placebo
2. Chlorhexidine-alcohol is preferred to general anesthesia in terms of major and can reduce the ﬁrst 24-hour
   aqueous povidone-iodine solution maternal or neonatal outcomes. This may maternal morphine consumption in the
   for abdominal skin cleansing before be due to the infrequency of death and setting of a multimodal analgesic
   cesarean delivery (evidence level: serious morbidity that leads to the inad- regimen.36 A Cochrane review of local
   low/recommendation grade: strong). equate power of most studies. Addition- analgesia inﬁltration and abdominal
3. Vaginal preparation with povidone- ally, because of a greater potential for nerve blocks found that these inﬁltrative
   iodine solution should be consid- postoperative sedation with general techniques improved  postoperative
   ered for the reduction of infections anesthesia, regional anesthesia may be the analgesia for caesarean delivery.37
                                                               e
   after cesarean delivery (evidence preferable choice in this regard.27 29
   level:  moderate/recommendation    Outcomes are similar for spinal and Summary and  recommendation. Re-
   grade: weak).                    epidural anesthesia30; the onset time for gional anesthesia is the preferred method
                                    an effective block is shorter and the of anesthesia for caesarean delivery as
Intraoperative cesarean delivery    incidence of intraoperative pain is lower part of an enhanced recovery protocol
pathway (focused elements)          for spinal than for epidural anesthesia.31 (evidence level: low/recommendation
Pre- and intraoperative anesthetic man- Combined spinal epidural anesthesia grade: strong).
agement (focused element)           may allow for a more rapid motor
Regional anesthesia has been found to recovery than spinal anesthesia,32 Prevention of intraoperative hypothermia
have a positive impact for enhanced re- although the presence of an epidural (focused element)
covery outcomes in terms of pain control, catheter provides a capability to extend Perioperative hypothermia can occur in
organ function, mobility, postoperative or prolong an inadequate spinal block.33 50e80% of patients who undergo spinal

                                                          DECEMBER 2018 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 537


Special Reports                                                                                  ajog.org

anesthesia for cesarean delivery.38,39 Summary and recommendation.      incised only at the midline in a transvers
Several randomized  control studies                                     fashion. The rectus sheath is separated
showed that perioperative hypothermia 1. Appropriate patient temperature along its ﬁbers with blunt dissection, and
is associated with complications in    monitoring is needed  to  apply  the rectus muscles are separated by pull-
nonpregnant patients.40,41 These com-  warming devices and avoid hypo-  ing. The parietal peritoneum is opened
plications have included surgical site thermia (evidence level: low/recom- digitally at the upper level of the inter-
infection, myocardial ischemia, altered mendation grade: strong).       muscular space and stretched in a cranial-
drug metabolism, coagulopathy, pro- 2. Forced air warming, intravenous  caudal direction. A small transverse
longed  duration of  hospitalization,  ﬂuid warming, and increasing oper- incision is made into the uterus with a
shivering, reduced skin integrity, and ating  room   temperature   are  scalpel, 2 cm above the vesical-uterine
                        e
poor patient satisfaction.42 44 Hypo-  all recommended to prevent hypo- fold until the membranes bulge, and 2
thermia can also have adverse effects on thermia during cesarean delivery index ﬁngers are inserted to stretch the
neonates, such as temperature, umbilical (evidence level: moderate/recom- opening laterally. A modiﬁcation to this
pH, Apgar score.45,46                  mendation grade: strong).        of cranial-caudal expansion has been
  Generally, patient core temperature is                                described and is associated with fewer
monitored  poorly during  neuraxial Cesarean delivery surgical techniques/ extensions and less blood loss.57,58 Over-
anesthesia.47,48 Skin temperature moni- considerations (focused element) all, the Joel-Cohen approach has been
toring can be used during neuraxial In the last decades, cesarean delivery associated with lower operative times and
anesthesia, but the temperatures are rates have increased in many countries lower blood loss.59
2.0e4.0 C less than the core tempera- and have become the most commonly
ture.49 Axillary temperatures can be performed intraperitoneal surgical pro- Repair of incision
measured if the sensor is placed over the cedure. Despite its worldwide spread, a The uterine incision is repaired
axillary artery with arms adducted to the consensus on the most appropriate ce- commonly in 1 or 2 layers with a
                                                                                                      e
side.50 Thus, it is important to consider sarean delivery technique to use has not continuous unlocked suture.60 62
how to best monitor a patient’s temper- yet been reached.54 The operative tech- Generally, a 2-layer closure has been
ature during surgery.               nique performed generally is based on used because of nonrandomized trial ev-
  A recent systematic review (13 ran- the individual experience and preference idence that suggests a higher rate of
domized controlled studies and 789 pa- of operators, the characteristics of pa- uterine rupture in women who had
tients) examined the efﬁcacy of active tients, and the timing and urgency of the pregnancies after a previous cesarean
warming during cesarean delivery.51 The intervention. However, there are many delivery with hysterotomies closed in a
active warming methods included forced randomized trials that have examined a single layer. However, the most recent
air warming  and  intravenous ﬂuid  variety of the approaches to various Cochrane review did not ﬁnd a difference
warming. Active warming group (either components of the cesarean delivery; in in outcomes between 1- or 2-layer
forced air warming or intravenous ﬂuid 1 recent study when a range of evidence- closure.58 The use of a delayed absorb-
warming) patients had signiﬁcantly less based approaches were adopted, cesar- able monoﬁlament (Monocryl; Ethicon
temperature change (P¼.0002), fewer ean delivery wound complications were Inc, Bridgewater, NJ) has been described,
shivering episodes (P¼.0004), higher reduced.55                         as has chromic catgut and Vicryl (Ethicon
temperature at end of surgery or on                                     Inc), without strong evidence to support
arrival to the postanesthetic care unit Surgical incision               a particular suture. There are studies of
(P<.00001), and higher umbilical artery The traditional approach to the cesarean blunt vs sharp needles that do not
pH  (P¼.04). A randomized controlled delivery has been the Pfannenstiel skin demonstrate beneﬁt to patients.63 In such
study showed ﬂuid warming combined  incision that is made sharply through the studies, a reduction in glove perforations
with forced air warming to be effective in subcutaneous tissue, sharply through the is seen (relative risk, 0.54; 95% conﬁ-
decreasing the incidence of perioperative fascia, and sharply entering the parietal dence interval, 0.41e0.71), but providers
hypothermia and improving maternal  peritoneum. The Kerr hysterotomy is also are less satisﬁed with blunt needles.64
thermal comfort.52                  made sharply in a transverse fashion into Historically, the visceral and parietal
  Ambient operating room  tempera-  the uterus. A bladder ﬂap commonly was peritoneum were closed; however, in sys-
ture can affect maternal and neonatal created to dissect the bladder inferiorly tematic reviews, there is no evidence that
temperature. A randomized controlled away from the hysterotomy, although a outcomes such as intraabdominal adhe-
trial with 799 patients demonstrated recent metaanalysis does not support this sions are different and that the operative
that operating room temperature at  being performed routinely.56        times are shorter leaving the peritoneum
23.0 C resulted in signiﬁcantly lower More recently, the Joel-Cohen incision open.56,65 Similarly, the rectus muscles
maternal hypothermia when compared  has been described. The subcutaneous commonly were sutured at the midline,
with the operating room temperature at tissue is left undisturbed apart from the but there is no evidence to support
20.0 C.53                           midline, and the abdominal fascia is closure, and there is concern that


538  American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018


ajog.org                                                                            Special Reports

intramuscular sutures will tear through.66 Summary and recommendation.  during spinal anesthesia for cesarean
The abdominal fascia is usually closed                                  delivery.80,81 Perioperative ﬂuid man-
with a continuous suture, PDS or Vicryl.67 1. Blunt expansion of a transverse agement is always a controversial topic
  The subcutaneous tissue, when it is <2 uterine hysterotomy at time of ce- in anesthesia practice. Adequate peri-
cm  in thickness is often not reapproxi- sarean delivery is recommended to operative ﬂuid administration can
mated. However, in women whose sub-    reduce surgical blood loss (evidence reduce surgical morbidities.82 Although
cutaneous tissue is  2 cm in thickness, level: moderate/recommendation  the use of intravenous ﬂuids to preload
reapproximation with catgut or Vicryl  grade: weak).                    the circulation is recommended, a recent
suture has been demonstrated to reduce 2. Closure of the hysterotomy in 2 layers consensus statement and accompanying
wound complications.68 Placement of a  may be associated with a lower rate of editorial suggest that intravenous ﬂuids
subcutaneous drain evenwith wounds >4  uterine rupture (evidence level: low/ alone have limited efﬁcacy and that
cm  in thickness has not been demon-   recommendation grade: weak).     many clinicians now administer pro-
strated to improve outcomes and has been 3. The peritoneum does not need to be phylactic phenylephrine infusions,
associated with worse wound outcomes.  closed because closure is not associated which not only prevent hypertension but
  The skin can be closed with staples or with improved outcomes and in- also reduce the risk of fetal acidosis.83,84
subcuticular/intracutaneous techniques creases operative times (evidence level: One metaanalysis and systematic review
with Vicryl or Monocryl. The most      low / recommendation grade: weak). showed that the use of goal-directed
recent Cochrane metaanalysis found no 4. In women with  2 cm of subcu-  ﬂuid therapy in patients who under-
difference between the 2 approaches    taneous tissue, reapproximation of went major surgery reduced post-
with regards to wound infections or    that tissue layer should be performed operative complications such as wound
complications overall.69 However, there (evidence level: moderate/recom- infection, abdominal complications, and
was a large trial published in 2014 that mendation grade: weak).        hypotension.85 Another metaanalysis
demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in 5. The skin closure should be closed and systematic review indicated that
wound complications70; in a subsequent with subcuticular suture in most goal-directed ﬂuid therapy signiﬁcantly
metaanalysis of skin closure that incor- cases, because of evidence of reduced reduced the incidence of surgical site
porated this trial, subcuticular closure wound separation in those whose infections and length of hospital stay
with suture was supported  for the     staples were removed  4 days after after abdominal surgery.86 However, the
reduction in wound  complications.71   surgery (evidence level: moderate/ number of high-quality research trials
Additionally, women    also   have     recommendation grade: weak).     that have evaluated the effects of goal-
improved  preference and experience                                     directed ﬂuid therapy during cesarean
scores with suture closure.72 One caveat Perioperative ﬂuid management  delivery is too few to provide consistent
is that the only difference is in wound (focused element)               evidence of beneﬁt.
separation; in many trials, staples were Perioperative euvolemia is an important More complex areas include patients
removed <4 days after surgery. Similarly, factor to obtain optimal outcomes after with cardiovascular disease, such as se-
in a recent trial of obese women only, cesarean delivery. Intravascular volume vere preeclampsia and preexisting car-
although there were no clinical differ- determines not only blood pressure but diac disease. These patients should have
ences, more women would choose su-  also cardiac output and oxygen delivery. multidisciplinary preoperative assess-
ture for a future surgery.73        Maintaining adequate uterine perfusion ment and planning and may require
  Once the wound is closed, there is cannot only optimize fetal oxygenation invasive blood pressure monitoring and
increasing evidence that prophylactic and prevent acidosis but also deliver cardiac output measurements to opti-
negative-pressure wound therapy may be nutrients and eliminate waste products mize both ﬂuid management and the use
useful, particularly in obese women. In a from the uterine myometrium.75 Peri- of vasoactive drugs or inotropes. These
recent systematic review, there was evi- operative ﬂuid overload has higher risks patients require vigilance not only before
dence of reduction in wound infections of increased cardiovascular work and delivery of the fetus but also with the
(relative risk, 0.45; 95% conﬁdence inter- pulmonary edema in pregnant  cardiovascular changes that may occur
val, 0.31e0.66) and overall wound com- women.76 Maternal intrapartum ﬂuid after the use of uterotonics and uterine
plications (relative risk, 0.68; 95% overload can result in newborn infant contraction after delivery.
conﬁdence interval, 0.49e0.94) in high- weight loss during the ﬁrst 3 days after
risk women (predominantly obese) who birth.77,78                        Summary  and  recommendation. Pre-
were assigned randomly to receive the The incidence of hypotension, after operative and intraoperative euvolemia
negative-pressure dressing.74 There are spinal anesthesia, is high and can cause are important factors in patient periop-
several ongoing trials at this time; thus, severe effects on the mother and fetus.79 erative care and appear to lead to
although it would be reasonable for a Studies show that a combination of va- improved maternal and neonatal out-
clinician to use this technology, there is a sopressors and adequate ﬂuid therapy comes after cesarean delivery (evidence
need for additional research to fully could be effective in reducing the inci- level: low to moderate/recommendation
address this question.              dence and  severity of hypotension  grade: strong).

                                                          DECEMBER 2018 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 539


Special Reports                                                                                  ajog.org

Neonate pathway (focused element)   neonatal normothermia.99 Immediate  lung disease/neurodevelopmental out-
Immediate care of the newborn infant drying and covering of the infant’s head comes). Electrocardiogram use is sup-
(optimized element)                 reduce heat losses while awaiting cord ported, although the other monitoring
The stress of being born exceeds that of clamping. Use of exothermic heaters or requires further evaluation.107
most other critical life-events, and there open bed incubators, transwarmer mat- Neonatal morbidity in a planned ce-
are signiﬁcant transitions in physiology tresses, plastic wraps/bags, and caps all sarean delivery setting was compared in 2
to accomplish. To promote a safe and keep preterm infants warmer  and   cohorts of women, those with no labor
successful transition from fetal to lead to higher temperatures on admis- and those with spontaneous onset of la-
neonatal life, the immediate care of the sion to neonatal units and less bor before the cesarean delivery.108 Data
                                                 e
newborn infant is important.        hypothermia.100 103 Body temperature were stratiﬁed for early term (37e38
  In all settings that perform cesarean should be measured and maintained weeks) and full term (39e40 weeks).
delivery, ﬁtness for service includes a between 36.5 C and 37.5 C after birth Among 103,919 live births, there were
capacity (equipment, stafﬁng, and skills) through admission and stabilization.87 5071 nonlabor and 731 postlabor onset
and   preparedness for   immediate    Besides hypothermia   prevention, cesarean deliveries. Similar risks for
neonatal resuscitation if needed.87 Apgar supporting the infant to regain body neonatal admission and respiratory
scores are important health and perfor- control and gently stimulating for ﬁrst distress were found for the 2 groups, but a
mance indicators and should be assessed breath or cry are recommended.  2- to 3-fold increase for neonatal septi-
and documented at 1, 5, and 10 minutes Approximately 85% of babies who are cemia or antibiotic use at early term was
after delivery. For the vigorous infant, born at term will initiate spontaneous identiﬁed. Labor onset at early term had
interventions in the operating room respirations within 10e30 seconds of decreased maternal blood loss of >500
include optimal timing of umbilical cord birth; an additional 10% will respond mL after cesarean delivery but increased
clamping,  hypothermia  prevention, during drying and stimulation, whereas endometritis and antibiotic use. The
facilitating onset of breathing, and the remaining 5% need some form of conclusion was that labor onset before
maternal-neonatal skin-to-skin contact. assisted ventilation.87 Routine suction- planned cesarean delivery was not asso-
  Delay of clamping of the umbilical ing of the airway or gastric aspiration ciated with a decrease in neonatal respi-
cord for at least 1 minute after term should be avoided; secretions should be ratory morbidity but may be associated
delivery decreases anemia in infancy and cleared only if they appear to be with increased risks of neonatal infection.
improves  neurodevelopmental  out-  obstructing the airway. A  similar
       e
comes.88 91 In cesarean delivery, the approach is recommended if meconium Summary and recommendations.
newborn infant can be placed on the is present in the amniotic ﬂuid.87,104,105
maternal abdomen or legs or held by Routine  neonatal  supplementation  1. Delayed cord clamping for at least 1
the surgeon or assistant close to the level (outside resuscitation) of the inspired air minute at a term delivery is recom-
of the placenta until the umbilical cord with oxygen may be associated with mended (evidence level: moderate/
is  clamped.92 In  preterm infants, harm and is not recommended.106       recommendation grade: strong).
delayed cord clamping for at least 30 The care of the preterm infant (<37 2. Delayed cord clamping for at least
seconds has been reported in systematic weeks gestation) can be optimized, 30 seconds at a preterm delivery is
reviews to contribute to less need for starting in the delivery room. Katheria recommended (evidence level: low-
transfusion, less intraventricular hem- et al107 review the use of checklists, moderate/recommendation grade:
orrhage, and lower risk for necrotizing avoidance of early cord clamping, strong).
enterocolitis than after immediate cord resuscitation during delayed cord 3. Body temperature should   be
          e
clamping.93 97 These ﬁndings have been clamping, consideration for early  measured and maintained at between
challenged by a large and recent ran- administration of caffeine soon after 36.5 C and 37.5 C after birth,
domized  controlled trial.98 Because birth, and the use of additional physio- through admission and stabilization
delayed cord clamping is associated with logic monitoring (electrocardiogram, (evidence level: low-moderate/
increased risk for hyperbilirubinemia, carbon dioxide, respiratory function recommendation grade: strong).
care providers should ensure they can (airway pressure/tidal volume) in the 4. Routine suctioning of the airway or
monitor   for and   treat neonatal  delivery area. A delivery room resusci- gastric aspiration should be avoided
         e
jaundice.88 91 Immediate cord clamping tation checklist directs communication and used only for symptoms of an
should be restricted to infants with im- and directed care. The beneﬁts of obstructive airway (by secretions or
mediate need of resuscitation or when delayed cord clamping and, if required, meconium; evidence level: low/
placental circulation is not intact. cord milking for cesarean delivery were recommendation grade: strong).
  Hypothermia   is associated with  supported. The early use of caffeine is 5. Routine neonatal supplementation
increased neonatal morbidity and death discussed; however, larger prospective with room air is recommended
across gestational ages. Standards for trials are required that are related to because the use of inspired air
operating room temperature (21e25 C) intubation, intraventricular hemor-  with oxygen is not recommended and
may   maintain both  maternal and   rhage, and long-term outcome (chronic may   be  associated with harm

540  American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018


ajog.org                                                                            Special Reports


  TABLE 3
  Enhanced Recovery After Surgery for cesarean delivery preoperative modiﬁable clinical factors
  Nonmodiﬁable clinical factors     Modiﬁable clinical factors
  Paternal age
  History (obstetrics/medical/surgery/body mass Optimization of selected comorbidities (hypertension/diabetes mellitus/anemia/smoking; small
  index)                            for gestational age/large for gestational
                                    age/stillbirth/preterm birth at <34 weeks gestation)
  Family history (genetics/birth defects/ Surgical pathway (preoperative, intraoperative, postoperative)
  multifactorial disease)
  Gestational weeks 0e20 (chromosomes/birth
  defects/miscarriage)
  Caughey. Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018.


   (evidence  level: low-moderate/  31.9% in 2015 in the United States. In uterine hematoma (4e6%), placenta
   recommendation grade: strong).   response to this increasing surgical ac- previa (1e2%), red cell transfusions
6. In all settings that perform cesarean tivity, many groups have attempted to (1e4%), hysterectomy (0.5e4%), and
   delivery, a capacity for immediate initiate process change, but the ap- placenta accreta (0.25e3%).115 Initia-
   neonatal resuscitation is mandatory proaches have varied and clinical care tives to reduce the frequency of cesarean
   (evidence level: high/recommenda- goals nationally have not been achieved delivery and enhance maternal safety
   tion grade: strong).             in terms of reduction of morbidity and have been initiated.116 Additionally, ap-
                                    mortality rates.110 The indications for a proaches to reducing complications in
Comments                            cesarean delivery have been summarized cesarean delivery have been adopted and
In North America, the most common   by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Unit demonstrated to be impactful.117
indication for admission to the hospital is Network: primary indications (dystocia The focused ERAS CD pathway has
childbirth, and the most common surgery 37%; nonreassuring fetal heart rate 25%; summarized a number of evidenced-
is a cesarean delivery. With this clinical abnormal fetal presentation 20%; other based intraoperative clinical care
volume of obstetric surgical activity, it 15%; failed forceps or vacuum delivery processes. Recommendations for the
seems appropriate that the ERAS process 3%); repeat indications (no vaginal birth scheduled/unscheduled cesarean de-
be applied to this surgical care arena to after cesarean section attempt 82%; livery with the level of evidence and the
improve patient outcomes with the use of failed vaginal birth after cesarean section recommendation grade are summarized
evidence-based approaches. Further, the attempt 17%; failed forceps or vacuum in Table 2. Each of the elements or pro-
impact may be even greater because there delivery 0.4%).111             cesses the focused ERAS CD pathway has
are always  2 patients (mother and fetus) Cesarean delivery has associated risk the opportunity to be measured,
impacted by such care.              and beneﬁt proﬁles for both processes of compared between services/providers,
  There  are quality industry-based unscheduled or  scheduled  surgery. and improved as required.
Deming principles that can be directed Complications associated with preg- Elements to consider, for the creation
toward healthcare process management nancy outcomes after a scheduled low- of a clinical audit tool,118 require (1) that
such: quality improvement is the science risk cesarean delivery (46,766 patients) the audited pathway has an important
of process management; if you cannot and planned vaginal birth (2,292,420 impact in terms of costs, resources, or
measure it, you cannot improve it;  patients) have been reported in a large risk, (2) that strong scientiﬁc evidence is
managed  care means managing   the  cohort study.112 The overall maternal available, and (3) that improvements
processes of care (not the human re- morbidity (cesarean delivery 2.23%; to be made on the topic in question can
sources of care); getting the right data in vaginal birth 0.9%) was not signiﬁcant be evaluated easily and become a source
the right format at the right time in the for all comparisons.112 Other investi- of important clinical/organizational
right hands; and engaging the human gators have reported a 2-fold increase for consequence(s).
healthcare resources (physicians, nurses, cesarean delivery with an increased The purpose of quality improvement
and other allied health professionals).109 morbidity outcome secondary to puer- is to enhance the safety, efﬁciency, and
Of course it is important to note that peral infection, hemorrhage, and effectiveness in the multiple areas of the
some signiﬁcant pregnancy-related fac- thromboembolism.113,114          healthcare process. Surgical healthcare
tors can be measured but cannot be    Comparisons of multiple repeat ce- has become a more delegated team sport
modiﬁed (Table 3).                  sarean deliveries has shown that, after with optimized preoperative preparation
  The frequency of a cesarean delivery the second repeat cesarean delivery, there (patient education/informed consent),
has increased from 4.5% in 1970 to  is an increasing risk for wound and improved surgical process and activity

                                                          DECEMBER 2018 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 541


Special Reports                                                                                                                 ajog.org

measurements of the services provided          7. Sullivan SA, Smith T, Chang E, Hulsey T,     agents at cesarean delivery. N  Engl J Med
(Surgical     Safety      Checklist/ERAS/      Vandorsten   JP, Soper D. Administration   of   2016;374:647–55.
                                               cefazolin prior to skin incision is superior to 21. Springel EH,   Wang    XY,  Sarfoh   VM,
National Surgical Quality Improvement
                            ﬁ                  cefazolin at cord clamping in preventing post-  Stetzer  BP,    Weight   SA,   Mercer   BM.
Program),      the    identi  cation    and    cesarean infectious morbidity: a randomized,    A  randomized  open-label controlled  trial of
removal of unjustiﬁed        systems and       controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;196: chlorhexidine-alcohol vs povidone-iodine  for
human-based variability, team building         455.e1–5.                                       cesarean antisepsis: the CAPICA trial. Am  J
practice (simulation), and the introduc-       8. Kaimal AJ, Zlatnik MG, Cheng YW, et al. Ef-  Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:463.e1–8.
                                               fect of a change in policy regarding the timing of 22. Darouiche RO, Wall MJ Jr, Itani KM, et al.
tion of new     training approaches and        prophylactic antibiotics on the rate of post-   Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidone-iodine
oversight (competency by design).              cesarean delivery surgical-site infections. Am J for surgical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med
   The ERAS CD guideline/pathway has           Obstet Gynecol 2008;199:310.e1–5.               2010;362:18–26.
created a focused pathway (for scheduled       9. Mackeen    AD,   Packard    RE,   Ota   E,   23. Haas DM, Morgan S, Contreras K. Vaginal
and unscheduled surgery starting from          Berghella V, Baxter JK. Timing of intravenous   preparation with antiseptic solution before ce-
  e                                            prophylactic antibiotics for preventing post-   sarean section for preventing postoperative in-
30  60 minutes before skin incision to         partum  infectious morbidity in women under-    fections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;12:
maternal discharge) with 5 preoperative        going cesarean delivery. Cochrane Database      CD007892.
elements     (8   recommendations);        4   Syst Rev 2014;5:CD009516.                       24. McIsaac DI, Cole ET, McCartney CJ. Impact
intraoperative elements (9 recommen-           10. Tita AT, Owen J, Stamm    AM, Grimes A,     of including regional anaesthesia in enhanced
dations); 9 postoperative elements (11         Hauth JC, Andrews WW. Impact of extended-       recovery protocols: a scoping review. Br J
                                               spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis on incidence of Anaesth 2015;115(suppl2):ii46–56.
recommendations); and          1   neonatal    postcesarean surgical wound infection. Am   J   25. Rollins M, Lucero J. Overview of anesthetic
element (6     recommendations). This          Obstet Gynecol 2008;199:303.e1–3.               considerations for cesarean delivery. Br Med
document focused speciﬁcally on the            11. Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al.   Bull 2012;101:105–25.
intraoperative pieces along with preop-        C/SOAP    Trial Consortium. Adjunctive   azi-   26. Afolabi BB, Lesi FE. Regional versus general
erative antibiotics and neonatal care.         thromycin prophylaxis for cesarean delivery.    anaesthesia for caesarean section. Cochrane
                                               N Engl J Med 2016;375:1231–41.                  Database Syst Rev 2012;10:CD004350.
   As clinicians adopt these approaches,       12. Hadiati DR, Hakimi M, Nurdiati DS, Ota E.   27. Bavaro JB, Mendoza JL, McCarthy RJ,
there is a need      to assess outcomes        Skin   preparation  for  preventing  infection  Toledo P, Bauchat JR. Maternal sedation during
continuously     and    to    use   quality    following caesarean section. Cochrane Data-     scheduled versus unscheduled cesarean de-
improvement approaches to incorporate          base Syst Rev 2014;17:CD007462.                 livery: implications for skin-to-skin contact. Int J
best practices. More prospective and           13. Swank    ML,   Wing   DA,   Nicolau  DP,    Obstet Anesth 2016;27:17–24.
                                               McNulty   JA.   Increased  3-gram    cefazolin  28. Moore ER, Anderson GC, Bergman N,
quality   assessment/improvement         re-   dosing for cesarean delivery prophylaxis in obese Dowswell T. Early skin-to-skin contact for
search, evaluation, audit, and        colla-   women. Am    J Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:415.     mothers and   their healthy newborn infants.
boration    will be    required    for   the   e1–8.                                           Cochrane    Database    Syst   Rev   2012;5:
enhancement of the maternal and fetal          14. Young OM, Shaik IH, Twedt R, et al. Phar-   CD003519.
health outcomes, quality, and safety.     -    macokinetics of cefazolin prophylaxis in obese  29. Wrench IJ, Allison A, Galimberti A, Radley S,
                                               gravidae at time of cesarean delivery. Am   J   Wilson MJ. Introduction of enhanced recovery
                                               Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:541.e1–7.               for elective caesarean section enabling next day
                                               15. Ahmadzia HK, Patel EM, Joshi D, et al. Ob-  discharge: a tertiary centre experience. Int J
REFERENCES                                     stetric surgical site infections: 2 grams compared Obstet Anesth 2015;24:124–30.
1. Steenhagen E. Enhanced recovery after sur-  with 3 grams of cefazolin in morbidly obese     30. Ng KW, Parsons J, Cyna AM, Middleton P.
gery: it’s time to change practice! Nutr Clin Pract women. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:708–15.     Spinal   versus  epidural   anaesthesia   for
2016;31:18–29.                                 16. Maggio   L,  Nicolau  DP,   DaCosta   M,    caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst
2. Elias KM. Understanding enhanced recovery   Rouse DJ, Hughes BL. Cefazolin prophylaxis in   Rev 2004;2:CD003765.
after surgery   guidelines: an   introductory  obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a     31. Schewe   JC, Komusin    A, Zinserling  J,
approach. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A       randomized   controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol   Nadstawek J, Hoeft A, Hering R. Effects of spinal
2017;27:871–5.                                 2015;125:1205–10.                               anaesthesia versus epidural anaesthesia for
3. Nelson G, Altman A, Nick A, et al. Guidelines 17. Valent AM, DeArmond C, Houston JM, et al. caesarean section on postoperative analgesic
for pre- and intraoperative care in gynecologic/ Effect of post-cesarean delivery oral cephalexin consumption and postoperative pain. Eur J
oncology  surgery: enhanced   recovery  after  and metronidazole on surgical site infection    Anaesthesiol 2009;26:52–9.
surgery (ERAS) society recommendations: part   among obese women: a randomized clinical        32. Lew  E, Yeo SW, Thomas E. Combined
I. Gynecol Oncol 2016;140:313–22.              trial. JAMA 2017;318:1026–34.                   spinal-epidural anesthesia using epidural vol-
4. Nelson G, Altman A, Nick A, et al. Guidelines 18. Berríos-Torres SI,    Umscheid     CA,    ume extension leads to faster motor recovery
for post-operative care in gynecologic/oncology Bratzler DW, et al. Healthcare infection control after elective caesarean delivery: a prospective,
surgery: enhanced    recovery  after surgery   practices advisory committee: Centers for Dis-  randomized, double-blind study. Anesth Analg
(ERAS) society recommendations     - part II.  ease Control and Prevention guideline for the   2004;98:810–4.
Gynecol Oncol 2016;140:323–32.                 prevention of surgical site infection. JAMA Surg 33. Thorén  T,  Holmström    B,  Rawal   N,
5. Guyatt GH, Oxman     AD, Vist GE, et al.    2017;152:784–91.                                Schollin  J,  Lindeberg   S,  Skeppner    G.
GRADE: an    emerging  consensus on    rating  19. Menderes G, Athar Ali N, Aagaard K, Sangi-  Sequential combined    spinal epidural block
quality of evidence and strength of recommen-  Haghpeykar       H.     Chlorhexidine-alcohol   versus  spinal block for caesarean   section:
dations. BMJ 2008;336:924–6.                   compared with povidone-iodine for surgical-site effects on maternal hypotension and neuro-
6. Smaill FM, Grivell RM. Antibiotic prophylaxis antisepsis in cesarean deliveries. Obstet Gyne- behavioural function of the newborn. Anesth
versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection col 2012;120:1037–44.                           Analg 1994;78:1087–92.
after cesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst 20. Tuuli MG,    Liu  J,  Stout  MJ,   et al.   34. Dahl JB, Jeppesen     IS, Jørgensen   H,
Rev 2014;28:CD007482.                          A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic    Wetterslev J, Møiniche S. Intraoperative and

542   American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018


ajog.org                                                                                                       Special Reports


postoperative analgesic efﬁcacy and adverse    49. Cork RC, Vaughan RW, Humphrey LS.           of uterine  rupture. Int J  Gynecol Obstet
effects of intrathecal opioids in patients under- Precision and accuracy of intraoperative tem- 2011;115:5.
going cesarean section with spinal anesthesia: a perature monitoring. Anesth Analg 1983;62:    63. Anderson ER, Gates S. Techniques and
qualitative and quantitative systematic review of 211–4.                                       materials for closure of the abdominal wall in
randomized  controlled trials. Anesthesiology  50. Sessler DI. Temperature monitoring and      caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst
1999;91:1919–27.                               management     during  neuraxial  anesthesia.   Rev 2004;4:CD004663.
35. Sultan P, Halpern SH, Pushpanathan E,      Anesth Analg 1999;88:243–5.                     64. Sullivan S, Williamson   B, Wilson   LK,
Patel S, Carvalho B. The effect of intrathecal 51. Sultan P, Habib AS, Cho Y, Carvalho B. The  Korte  JE, Soper D. Blunt needles for the
morphine  dose  on  outcomes after elective    Effect of patient warming during caesarean de-  reduction of needlestick injuries during cesarean
cesarean  delivery: a meta-analysis. Anesth    livery on maternal and neonatal outcomes: a     delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet
Analg 2016;123:154–64.                         meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2015;115:500–10.    Gynecol 2009;114:211–6.
36. Abdallah FW, Halpern SH, Margarido CB.     52. Cobb   B, Cho    Y, Hilton   G, Ting   V,   65. Bamigboye   AA, Hofmeyr GJ. Closure
Transversus abdominis plane block for post-    Carvalho B. Active warming utilizing combined IV versus non-closure  of the   peritoneum  at
operative analgesia after caesarean  delivery  ﬂuid and forced-air warming decreases hypo-     caesarean section: short- and long-term out-
performed under spinal anaesthesia? A sys-     thermia and improves maternal comfort during    comes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;8:
tematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth cesarean delivery: a randomized control trial.  CD000163.
2012;109:679–87.                               Anesth Analg 2016;122:1490–7.                   66. Lyell DJ, Caughey AB, Hu E, et al. Rectus
37. Bamigboye AA, Hofmeyr GJ. Local anaes-     53. Duryea EL, Nelson DB, Wyckoff MH, et al.    muscle and visceral peritoneum closure at ce-
thetic wound inﬁltration and abdominal nerves  The impact of ambient operating room temper-    sarean delivery and intraabdominal adhesions.
block  during  caesarean  section  for post-   ature on neonatal and maternal hypothermia and  Obstet Gynecol 2012;206:515.
operative pain relief. Cochrane Database Syst  associated morbidities: a randomized controlled 67. Israelsson LA, Millbourn D. Prevention of
Rev 2009;3:CD006954.                           trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016;214:505.e1–7.   incisional hernias. Surg Clin N Am  2013;93:
38. Butwick AJ, Lipman SS, Carvalho B. Intra-  54. Dahlke JD, Mendez-Figueroa H, Rouse DJ,     1027.
operative forced air-warming during cesarean   Berghella V, Baxter JK, Chauhan SP. Evidence-   68. Husslein H, Gutschi M, Leipold H, et al.
delivery under spinal anesthesia does not pre- based surgery for cesarean delivery: an updated Suture closure versus non-closure of subcu-
vent  maternal hypothermia. Anesth     Analg   systematic  review. Am    J  Obstet Gynecol     taneous fat and cosmetic outcome after cesar-
2007;105:1413–9.                               2013;209:294–306.                               ean section: a randomized controlled trial. PLOS
39. Harper CM, Alexander R. Hypothermia and    55. Temming LA, Raghuraman N, Carter EB,        One 2014;9:e114730.
spinal anesthesia. Anaesthesia 2006;61:612.    et al. Impact of evidence-based interventions on 69. Mackeen  AD, Berghella  V, Larsen   ML.
40. Frank SM, Fleisher LA, Breslow MJ, et al.  wound complications after cesarean delivery.    Techniques and materials for skin closure in
Perioperative maintenance of normothermia re-  Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:449.e1–9.          caesarean section. Cochrane Darabase Syst
duces the incidence of morbid cardiac events: a 56. O’Neill HA, Egan G, Walsh CA, Cotter AM,   Rev 2012;11:CD003577.
randomized   clinical trial. JAMA 1997;277:    Walsh SR. Omission of the bladder     ﬂap at    70. Mackeen AD, Khalifeh A, Fleisher J, et al.
1127–34.                                       caesarean section reduces delivery time without Suture compared with staple skin closure after
41. Kurz A, Sessler DI, Lenhardt R. Periopera- increased morbidity: a meta-analysis of ran-    cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial.
tive normothermia to reduce the incidence of   domized controlled trials. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:1169–75.
surgical-wound infection and shorten hospitali- Reprod Biol 2014;174:20–6.                     71. Mackeen AD, Schuster M, Berghella V. Su-
zation: Study of Wound Infection and Temper-   57. Vitale SG, Marilli I, Cignini P, et al. Compar- ture versus staples for skin closure after cesar-
ature Group. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1209–15.    ison  between  modiﬁed   Misgav-Ladach   and    ean: a metaanalysis. Am   J Obstet Gynecol
42. Melling AC, Ali B, Scott EM, Leaper DJ. Ef- Pfannenstiel-Kerr techniques for cesarean sec- 2015;212:621.e1–10.
fects of preoperative warming on the incidence tion: review of literature. J Prenat Med 2014;8: 72. Fleisher J, Khalifeh A, Pettker C, Berghella V,
of wound infection after clean surgery: a rando- 36–41.                                        Dabbish N, Mackeen AD. Patient satisfaction
mised controlled trial. Lancet 2001;358:876–80. 58. Dodd   JM,   Anderson   ER,   Gates   S,   and cosmetic outcome in a randomized study of
43. Rajagopalan S, Mascha E, Na J, Sessler DI. Grivell RM. Surgical techniques for uterine inci- cesarean skin closure. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
The effects of mild perioperative hypothermia on sion and uterine closure at the time of caesarean Med 2018;24:1–6.
blood loss and transfusion requirement. Anes-  section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;7:     73. Zaki MN, Wing DA, McNulty JA. Compari-
thesiology 2008;108:71–7.                      CD004732.                                       son of staples vs subcuticular suture in class III
44. Sessler DI. Complications and treatment of 59. Saad   AF, Rahman    M, Costantine  MM,     obese women undergoing cesarean: a ran-
mild hypothermia. Anesthesiology    2001;95:   Saade GR. Blunt versus sharp uterine incision   domized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
531–43.                                        expansion during low transverse cesarean de-    2018;218:451.e1–8.
45. Horn EP, Schroeder F, Gottschalk A, et al. livery: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol     74. Yu L, Kronen RJ, Simon LE, Stoll CRT,
Active warming during cesarean delivery. Anesth 2014;211:684.e1–11.                            Colditz GA, Tuuli MG. Prophylactic negative-
Analg 2002;94:409–14.                          60. Di   Spiezio  Sardo    A,  Saccone    G,    pressure wound therapy after cesarean is asso-
46. Yokoyama   K, Suzuki M, Shimada       Y,   McCurdy R, Bujold E, Bifulco G, Berghella V.    ciated with reduced risk of surgical site infection:
Matsushima T, Bito H, Sakamoto A. Effect of    Risk of cesarean scar defect following single-  a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am  J
administration of pre-warmed intravenous ﬂuids vs  double-layer uterine  closure: systematic   Obstet Gynecol 2018;218:200–10.e1.
on the frequency of hypothermia following spinal review and  meta-analysis   of  randomized    75. Dawood F, Dowswell T, Quenby S. Intra-
anesthesia for Cesarean delivery. J Clin Anesth controlled trials. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol   venous ﬂuids for reducing the duration of labour
2009;21:242–8.                                 2017;50:578–83.                                 in low risk nulliparous women. Cochrane Data-
47. Frank  SM,   Nguyen   JM,   Garcia  CM,    61. Glavind J, Madsen LD, Uldbjerg N, et al.    base Syst Rev 2013;6:CD007715.
Barnes RA. Temperature monitoring practices    Ultrasound evaluation of cesarean scar after    76. Carvalho JC, Mathias RS. Intravenous hy-
during  regional anesthesia.  Anesth   Analg   single- and double-layer uterotomy closure: a   dration in  obstetrics. Int Anesthesiol Clin
1999;88:373–7.                                 cohort  study. Ultrasound    Obstet  Gynecol    1994;32:103–15.
48. Glosten B, Sessler DI, Faure EAM, et al.   2013;42:207.                                    77. Chantry CJ, Nommsen-Rivers LA. Excess
Central temperature changes are not perceived  62. Roberge S, Chaillet N, Boutin A, et al. Sin- weight loss in ﬁrst-born breastfed newborns
during  epidural anesthesia. Anesthesiology    gle- versus double-layer closure of the hyster- relates to maternal intrapartum ﬂuid balance.
1992;77:10–6.                                  otomy incision during cesarean delivery and risk Pediatrics 2011;127:171–9.

                                                                             DECEMBER 2018   American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 543


Special Reports                                                                                                                 ajog.org

78. Noel-Weiss J, Woodend AK, Peterson WE,     clamping  of term   infants on maternal and     105. Foster  JP,  Dawson    JA,  Davis   PG,
Gibb W, Groll D. An observational study of as- neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst       Dahlen HG. Routine oro/nasopharyngeal suc-
sociations among maternal ﬂuids during partu-  Rev 2013;7:CD004074.                            tion versus no suction at birth. Cochrane Data-
rition, neonatal output, and breastfed newborn 92. Committee   Opinion  No. 684   Summary:     base Syst Rev 2017;4:CD010332.
weight loss. Int Breastfeed J 2011;6:1–10.     delayed  umbilical cord clamping after birth.   106. Tan A, Schulze A, O’Donnell CP, Davis PG.
79. Mercier FJ. Fluid loading for cesarean de- Obstet Gynecol 2017;129:232–3.                  Air versus oxygen for resuscitation of infants at
livery under spinal anesthesia: Have we studied 93. Ghavam S, Batra D, Mercer J, et al. Effects birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;2:
all the options? Anesth Analg 2011;113:677–80. of placental transfusion in extremely low birth- CD002273.
80. Ngan Kee WD, Khaw KS, Ng FF. Prevention    weight infants: meta-analysis of long- and short- 107. Katheria A, Rich W, Finer N. Optimizing
of hypotension during spinal anesthesia for ce- term outcomes. Transfusion 2014;54:1192–8.     care of the preterm infant starting in the delivery
sarean delivery: an effective technique using  94. Rabe   H,   Diaz-Rossello JL,   Duley  L,   room. Am J Perinatol 2016;33:297–304.
combination phenylephrine infusion and crys-   Dowswell T. Effect of timing of umbilical cord  108. Glavind  J,   Milidou  J,  Uldbjerg  N,
talloid cohydration. Anesthesiology 2005;103:  clamping  and   other strategies to inﬂuence    Maimburg    R,   Henriksen    TB.   Neonatal
744–50.                                        placental transfusion  at preterm   birth on    morbidity after spontaneous labor onset prior
81. Mercier FJ. Cesarean delivery ﬂuid man-    maternal and infant outcomes. Cochrane Data-    to  intended  cesarean  delivery at term: a
agement. Curr Opin    Anaesthesiol 2012;25:    base Syst Rev 2012;8:CD003248.                  cohort study. Acta   Obstet Gynecol Scand
286–91.                                        95. Rabe   H, Reynolds G, Diaz-Rossello    J.   2017;96:479–86.
82. Bellamy MC. Wet, dry or something else? Br A systematic review and meta-analysis of a brief 109. Orsini JN. The essential Deming: leader-
J Anaesth 2006;97:755–7.                       delay in clamping the umbilical cord of preterm ship principles from the father of quality. New
83. Kinsella SM, Carvalho B, Dyer RA, et al. In- infants. Neonatology 2008;93:138–44.          York: McGraw Hill Professional; 2012.
ternational consensus statement on the man-    96. Fogarty M, Osborn DA, Askie L, et al.       110. Cesarean Delivery and Peripartum   Hys-
agement of hypotension    with vasopressors    Delayed vs early umbilical cord clamping for    terectomy. In: Cunningham   FG, Leveno KJ,
during caesarean section under spinal anaes-   preterm infants: a systematic review and meta-  Bloom  SL, Hauth JC, Rouse DJ, Spong CY,
thesia. Anaesthesia 2018;73:71–92.             analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2018;218:1–18.    editors. Williams Obstetrics, 23rd Ed. New York:
84. Campbell JP, Stocks GM. Management of      97. Rabe   H, Reynolds G, Diaz-Rossello    J.   McGraw-Hill; 2010:544-8.
hypotension with vasopressors at caesarean     A systematic review and meta-analysis of a brief 111. Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth J, et al.
section under spinal anaesthesia: have we found delay in clamping the umbilical cord of preterm Fetal injury associated with cesarean delivery.
the Holy Grail of obstetric anaesthesia? Anaes- infants. Neonatology 2008;93:138–44.           Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:885.
thesia 2018;73:3–6.                            98. Tarnow-Mordi W, Morris J, Kirby A, et al.   112. Liu SL, Liston RM, Joseph KS, et al.
85. Som   A,   Maitra  S,  Bhattacharjee  S,   Delayed versus immediate cord clamping in       Maternal mortality and severe morbidity associ-
Baidya DK. Goal directed   ﬂuid therapy de-    preterm  infants. N  Engl J  Med   2017;377:    ated with low-risk planned cesarean delivery
creases postoperative morbidity but not mortal- 2445–55.                                       versus planned vaginal delivery at term. CMAJ
ity in major non-cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis 99. Duryea EL, Nelson  DB, Wyckoff MH,       2007;176:455.
and  trial sequential analysis of randomized   et al. The impact of ambient operating room     113. Villar J, Carroli G, Zavaleta N, et al.
controlled trials. J Anesth 2017;31:66–81.     temperature on neonatal and maternal hypo-      Maternal and neonatal individual risks and ben-
86. Yuan J, Sun Y, Pan C, Li T. Goal-directed  thermia  and  associated  morbidities: a ran-   eﬁts associated with cesarean delivery: multi-
ﬂuid therapy for reducing risk of surgical site in- domized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol centre prospective study. BMJ 2007;335:1025.
fections following abdominal surgery: a sys-   2016;214:505.                                   114. Burrows LJ, Meyn LA, Weber AM, et al.
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 100. Li S, Guo P, Zou Q, He F, Xu F, Tan L. Ef- Maternal morbidity  associated  with  vaginal
controlled trials. Int J Surg 2017;39:74–87.   ﬁcacy and safety of plastic wrap for prevention of versus cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol
87. Perlman JM, Wyllie J, Kattwinkel J, et al. Part hypothermia after birth and during NICU in pre- 2004;103:907–12.
7: neonatal resuscitation: 2015  International term  infants: a systematic review and meta-    115. Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al.
consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation     analysis. PLoS One 2016;11:e0156960.            Maternal morbidity associated   with multiple
and emergency cardiovascular care science      101. McCall EM, Alderdice    F, Halliday HL,    repeat cesarean   deliveries. Obstet Gynecol
with treatment recommendations. Circulation    Jenkins JG, Vohra S. Interventions to prevent   2006;107:1226–32.
2015;132(suppl1):S204–41.                      hypothermia at birth in preterm   and/or low    116. Lagrew  DC, Low   LK, Brennan R, et al.
88. Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth. birthweight infants. Cochrane Database Syst   National  partnership  for  maternal  safety:
Pediatrics 2017;139:e20170957.                 Rev 2010;3:CD004210.                            Consensus bundle on safe reduction of primary
89. Bayer K. Delayed umbilical cord clamping in 102. Perlman J, Kjaer K. Neonatal and maternal cesarean births: supporting intended  vaginal
the 21st century: indications for practice. Adv temperature regulation during and after delivery. births. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:503–13.
Neonatal Care 2016;16:68–73.                   Anesth Analg 2016;123:168–72.                   117. Temming LA, Raghuraman N, Carter EB,
90. Kc A, Rana N, Målqvist M, et al. Effects of 103. Russo A, McCready M, Torres L, et al.     et al. Impact of evidence-based interventions on
delayed  umbilical cord  clamping   vs  early  Reducing   hypothermia   in  preterm  infants   wound complications after cesarean delivery.
clamping on anemia in infants at 8 and 12      following   delivery. Pediatrics   2014;133:    Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:449.e1–9.
months: a   randomized   clinical trial. JAMA  e1055–62.                                       118. Esposito P, Dal Canton A. Clinical audit, a
Pediatr 2017;171:264–70.                       104. Committee Opinion No. 689 Summary:         valuable tool to improve quality of care: general
91. McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T,      delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained     methodology and applications in nephrology.
Morris PS. Effect of timing of umbilical cord  amniotic ﬂuid. Obstet Gynecol 2017;129:593–4.   World J Nephrol 2014;3:249–55.


544   American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology DECEMBER 2018



