World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083
DOI 10.1007/s00268-016-3492-3

 SCIENTIFIC REVIEW

Guidelines for Perioperative Care in Bariatric Surgery: Enhanced
Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society Recommendations

         1                   2,3         4,5           4           6
A. Thorell • A. D. MacCormick   • S. Awad  • N. Reynolds • D. Roulin •
             6             7           8            9            10
N. Demartines  • M. Vignaud • A. Alvarez • P. M. Singh • D. N. Lobo


Published online: 4 March 2016
Ó Socie´te´ Internationale de Chirurgie 2016


   Abstract
   Background  During the last two decades, an increasing number of bariatric surgical procedures have been per-
   formed worldwide. There is no consensus regarding optimal perioperative care in bariatric surgery. This review aims
   to present such a consensus and to provide graded recommendations for elements in an evidence-based ‘‘enhanced’’
   perioperative protocol.
   Methods  The English-language literature between January 1966 and January 2015 was searched, with particular
   attention paid to meta-analyses, randomised controlled trials and large prospective cohort studies. Selected studies
   were examined, reviewed and graded. After critical appraisal of these studies, the group of authors reached a
   consensus recommendation.
   Results Although for some elements, recommendations are extrapolated from non-bariatric settings (mainly col-
   orectal), most recommendations are based on good-quality trials or meta-analyses of good-quality trials.
   Conclusions A comprehensive evidence-based consensus was reached and is presented in this review by the
   enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) Society. The guidelines were endorsed by the International Association for
   Surgical Metabolism and Nutrition (IASMEN) and based on the evidence available in the literature for each of the
   elements of the multimodal perioperative care pathway for patients undergoing bariatric surgery.


&  A. Thorell
                                                     6  Department of Visceral Surgery, University Hospital CHUV,
   anders.thorell@erstadiakoni.se
                                                        Lausanne, Switzerland
1  Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Sciences, 7 De´partement d’anesthe´sie reanimation Service de chirurgie
   Danderyds Hospital & Department of Surgery, Ersta    digestive, CHU estaing 1, place Lucie et Raymond Aubrac,
   Hospital, 116 91 Stockholm, Sweden                   Clermont Ferrand, France
2  Department of Surgery, University of Auckland, Auckland, 8 Department of Anesthesia, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires,
   New Zealand                                          Buenos Aires University, 1179 Buenos Aires, Argentina
3  Department of Surgery, Counties Manukau Health,   9  Department of Anesthesia, All India Institute of Medical
   Auckland, New Zealand                                Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India
4  The East-Midlands Bariatric & Metabolic Institute, Derby 10 Gastrointestinal Surgery, National Institute for Health
   Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Royal Derby Research Nottingham Digestive Diseases Biomedical
   Hospital, Derby DE22 3NE, UK                         Research Unit, Nottingham University Hospitals and
                                                        University of Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Centre,
5  School of Clinical Sciences, University of Nottingham,
                                                        Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK
   Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK

                                                                                               123


2066                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

Introduction                                         gastrectomy’’, ‘‘fast track’’ and ‘‘enhanced recovery’’.
                                                     Reference lists of all eligible articles were checked for
Bariatric surgery is the most effective treatment for other relevant studies.
morbid obesity, resulting in sustained weight loss as well
as pronounced effects on obesity-related comorbidities. Study selection
The   number  of  procedures  performed  worldwide
increased from 146,000 to 340,000 between 2003 and   Titles and abstracts were screened by individual authors to
2011, with Roux-en-Y  gastric bypass and sleeve gas- identify potentially relevant articles. Discrepancies in
trectomy accounting for approximately 75 % of all pro- judgment were resolved by the ﬁrst and senior authors and
cedures [1]. In the 2013  Scandinavian Registry for  through correspondence within the writing group. Particu-
Obesity Surgery (SOReg) annual report which included lar emphasis was placed on recent publications of good
[8000   procedures ‘‘any complication’’ and ‘‘severe quality (moderate- and high-quality RCTs and large high-
complication’’ (Clavien grade [3a) [2] within 30 days quality cohort studies as well as systematic reviews and
were reported to be 7 and 3 %, respectively [3]. Similar meta-analyses) which were considered for each topic.
ﬁgures were reported from the United Kingdom in 2014 Retrospective series were included if data of better quality
[4].                                                 were lacking. Conference proceedings were excluded.
  Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathways
involve a series of perioperative evidence-based interven- Quality assessment and data analysis
tions that were developed initially for elective colorectal
surgery [5]. ERAS pathways aim to maintain physiological The methodological quality of the studies was assessed
function, enhance mobilisation, reduce pain and facilitate using the Delphi checklist [12]. The strength of evidence
early oral nutrition postoperatively by reducing periopera- and conclusions were assessed and agreed by all authors.
tive surgical stress. The adoption of ERAS pathways has Quality of evidence and recommendations were evaluated
resulted in improved outcome in terms of reduced mor- according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assess-
bidity, faster recovery and reduced length of hospital stay ment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system [13].
in dedicated centres [6–11]. Although several of the indi- Quoting from the GRADE guidelines, the recommenda-
vidual ERAS components have been introduced in the   tions are given as follows: ‘‘Strong recommendations
setting of bariatric surgery, there are few reports in the indicate that the panel is conﬁdent that the desirable effects
literature on the effects resulting from adoption of com- of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the undesir-
plete ERAS pathways.                                 able effects’’. ‘‘Weak recommendations indicate that the
  This article represents an initiative by the ERAS Society desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation prob-
(www.erassociety.org) to present a consensus review of ably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the panel is less
optimal perioperative care for bariatric surgery based on conﬁdent’’. Recommendations are based not only on
best evidence available currently. The guidelines were quality of evidence (‘‘high’’, ‘‘moderate’’, ‘‘low’’ and ‘‘very
endorsed by the International Association for Surgical low’’) but also on the balance between desirable and
Metabolism and Nutrition (IASMEN;  www.iasmen.org)   undesirable effects and on values and preferences [13]. The
after review of the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.  latter implies that, in some cases, strong recommendations
                                                     may be reached from low-quality data and vice versa.

Methods                                              Results: evidence base and recommendations

Literature search                                    The recommendations, evidence and grade of recommen-
                                                     dation are summarised in Table 1.
The authors corresponded by email during the fall of 2013
and the various topics for inclusion were agreed and allo- Preoperative interventions
cated. The literature search utilised the Medline, Embase
and Cochrane databases to identify relevant contributions Preoperative information, education and counselling
published between January  1966 and  January 2015.
Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms were used, as   There is little evidence available on the impact of infor-
were accompanying entry terms for the patient group, mation, education or counselling prior to bariatric surgery.
interventions and  outcomes. Key   words   included  Preoperative information and/or a visit to the ward has
‘‘obesity’’, ‘‘obese’’, ‘‘bariatric’’, ‘‘gastric bypass’’, ‘‘sleeve been shown to reduce anxiety and improve compliance
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                                 2067

Table 1 ERAS recommendations for (a) preoperative, (b) intraoperative and (c) postoperative care in bariatric surgery
Element             Recommendation                                     Level of evidence       Recommendation grade

(a)
Preoperative        Patients should receive preoperative counselling   Moderate                Strong
  information,
  education and
  counselling
Prehabilitation and Although prehabilitation may improve functional recovery, Low              Weak
  exercise            there are insufﬁcient data in the literature to recommend
                      prehabilitation before bariatric surgery for the reduction
                      of complications or length of stay
Smoking and alcohol Tobacco smoking should be stopped at least 4 weeks before Smoking: High    Strong
  cessation           surgery. For patients with a history of alcohol abuse, Alcohol: Low (only one
                      abstinence should be strictly adhered to for at least high-quality RCT)
                      2 years. Moreover, the risk of relapse (or new onset in
                      patients without earlier abuse) after gastric bypass should
                      be acknowledged
Preoperative weight Preoperative weight loss should be recommended prior to Postoperative      Strong
  loss                bariatric surgery Patients on glucose-lowering drugs complications: High
                      should be aware of the risk of hypoglycaemia     Postoperative weight loss:
                                                                         Low (inconsistency, low
                                                                         quality)
Glucocorticoids     Eight mg dexamethasone should be administered i.v., Low (no RCTs in bariatric Strong
                      preferably 90 min prior to induction of anaesthesia for surgery)
                      reduction of PONV as well as inﬂammatory response
Preoperative fasting Obese patients may have clear ﬂuids up to 2 h and solids up Non-diabetic obese Strong
                      to 6 h prior to induction of anaesthesia. Further data are patients: High
                      necessary in diabetic patients with autonomic neuropathy Diabetic patients without Weak
                      due to potential risk of aspiration                Autonomic neuropathy:
                                                                         Moderate
                                                                       Diabetic patients with  Weak
                                                                         autonomic neuropathy:
                                                                         Low
Carbohydrate loading While preoperative oral carbohydrate conditioning in Shortened preoperative Strong
                      patients undergoing major abdominal elective surgery has fasting (Non-diabetic
                      been associated with metabolic and clinical beneﬁts, obese patients): Low
                      further data are required in morbidly obese patients. Diabetic patients without
                      Similarly, further data are needed on preoperative autonomic neuropathy:
                      carbohydrate conditioning in patients with gastro- Moderate
                      oesophageal reﬂux who may be at increased risk of
                                                                       Diabetic patients with
                      aspiration during anaesthetic induction
                                                                         autonomic neuropathy:
                                                                         Low
                                                                       Preoperative
                                                                         carbohydrate loading in
                                                                         obese patients: Low
(b)
Perioperative ﬂuid  Excessive intraoperative ﬂuids are not needed to prevent Maintenance as opposed Maintenance ﬂuid
  management          rhabdomyolysis and maintain urine output. Functional to liberal ﬂuid       regimens: Strong
                      parameters, such as stroke volume variation facilitate regimens: Moderate
                      goal-directed ﬂuid therapy and avoid intraoperative Reduce stress response:
                      hypotension and excessive ﬂuid administration.     Moderate
                      Postoperative ﬂuid infusions should be discontinued as
                                                                       Open surgery: High
                      soon as practicable with preference given to use of the
                      enteral route                                    Laparoscopic surgery:
                                                                         Moderate
PONV                A multimodal approach to PONV prophylaxis should be Low                    Strong
                      adopted in all patients


                                                                                                            123


2068                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

Table 1 continued
Element             Recommendation                                     Level of evidence       Recommendation grade

Standardised        The current evidence does not allow recommendation of Low                  Weak
  anaesthetic         speciﬁc anaesthetic agents or techniques
  protocol
Airway management   Anaesthetists should be aware of the speciﬁc difﬁculties in Moderate       Strong
                      managing bariatric airway
                    Tracheal intubation remains the reference for airway Moderate              Strong
                      management
Ventilation strategies Lung protective ventilation should be adopted for elective Moderate     Strong
                      bariatric surgery
                    Patient positioning in an anti-Trendelenburg, ﬂexed hip, Low               Weak
                      anti- or beach chair positioning, particularly in the
                      absence of pneumoperitoneum improves pulmonary
                      mechanics and gas exchange
Neuromuscular block Deep neuromuscular block improves surgical performance Low                 Weak
                    Ensuring full reversal of neuromuscular blockade improves Moderate         Strong
                      patient recovery
                    Objective qualitative monitoring of neuromuscular blockade Moderate        Strong
                      improves patient recovery
Monitoring of       BIS monitoring of anaesthetic depth should be considered High              Strong
  anaesthetic depth   where ETAG monitoring is not employed
Laparoscopy         Laparoscopic surgery for bariatric surgery is recommended High             Strong
                      whenever expertise is available
Nasogastric tube    Routine use of nasogastric tube is not recommended Low                     Strong
                      postoperatively
Abdominal drainage  There is insufﬁcient evidence to recommend routine use of Low              Weak
                      abdominal drainage
(c)
Postoperative       Multimodal systemic medication and local anaesthetic Multimodal intravenous Multimodal intravenous
  analgesia           inﬁltration techniques should be combined. Thoracic medication, local      medication, local
                      epidural analgesia should be considered in laparotomy anaesthetic inﬁltration: anaesthetic inﬁltration:
                                                                         High                    Strong
                                                                       Epidural analgesia: Very Epidural analgesia: Weak
                                                                         low
Thromboprophylaxis  Thromboprophylaxis should involve mechanical and   Mechanical measures in  Strong
                      pharmacological measures with LMWH. Dosage and     combination with
                      duration of treatment should be individualised     LMWH:  High
                                                                       Dosage of LMWH: Low     Weak
Early postoperative Protein intake should be monitored. Iron, vitamin B12 and Nutritional      Strong
  nutrition           calcium supplementation is mandatory               supplementation:
                    Postoperative glycaemic and lipid control has to be strict in Moderate
                     patients with diabetes                            Glycaemic control: High Strong
Postoperative       Obese patients without OSA, should be supplemented with Prophylactic oxygen Strong
  oxygenation         oxygen prophylactically in head-elevated or semi-sitting supplementation: Low
                      position in the immediate postoperative period     (only retrospective data)
                                                                       Positioning in the      Strong
                                                                         postoperative period:
                                                                         High
                    Uncomplicated patients with OSA should receive oxygen High (14 RCTs and 1  Strong
                      supplementation in a semi-sitting position. Monitoring for meta-analysis)
                      possible increasing frequency of apnoeic episodes should
                      be diligent. A low threshold for initiation of positive
                      pressure support must be maintained in the presence of
                      signs of respiratory distress


123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                   2069

Table 1 continued
Element           Recommendation                               Level of evidence   Recommendation grade

Non-invasive positive Prophylactic routine postoperative CPAP is not Moderate (only Avoiding routine use of
  pressure ventilation recommended in obese patients without diagnosed OSA retrospective data) CPAP: Weak
                  CPAP therapy should be considered in patients with BMI Low       Strong
                   [50 kg/m2, severe OSA or oxygen saturation B90 % on
                   oxygen supplementation
                  Obese patients with OSA on home CPAP therapy should use Moderate (Only Strong
                   their equipment in the immediate postoperative period retrospective data)
                  Patients with Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome (OHS) Low (Only retrospective Strong
                   should receive postoperative BiPAP/NIV prophylactically data)
                   along with intensive care level monitoring

with postoperative instructions, postoperative recovery, completed prehabilitation prior to colectomy but whose
length of stay and long-term outcomes [14–20]. A preop- ﬁtness still deteriorated were more likely to suffer com-
erative psychological intervention has also been shown to plications requiring reoperation or intensive care. A further
reduce fatigue and stress and improve wound healing  RCT incorporated ‘trimodal prehabilitation’ which inclu-
postoperatively [21, 22]. Two systematic reviews of patient ded nutritional counselling with protein supplementation,
education [23, 24] evaluated outcomes including biophys- anxiety reduction and a moderate exercise program [34]
ical, functional, experiential, cognitive, social, ethical and showed no difference in complication rates or length of
ﬁnancial parameters. They identiﬁed variable impact of stay but better functional recovery at 4 and 8 weeks.
education on outcome but positive results were in a     Despite prehabilitation being attractive and logical,
minority. A subsequent RCT of preoperative education in there is sparse evidence linking improvement of physio-
knee arthroplasty has shown a reduction in length of stay logical function with preoperative exercise and decreased
[25]. Speciﬁc guidelines have recommended preoperative postoperative complications.
information [26–28].
                                                     Smoking and alcohol cessation
Prehabilitation and exercise
                                                     In many centres, as well as in most guidelines, drug or
Prehabilitation comprises preoperative physical condition- alcohol abuse during the preceding 2 years is considered
ing to improve functional and physiological capacity to contraindications for bariatric surgery [35].
enable patients to recover sooner after surgical stress [29, Tobacco smoking is associated with increased risk of
30]. Improved preoperative physiological status results in postoperative morbidity and mortality [36], attributed
an improved postoperative physiological status and faster mainly to reduced tissue oxygenation (and consequent
recovery, decreased postoperative complications and  wound infections) [37], pulmonary complications [38] and
length of stay.                                      thromboembolism  [38]. Several controlled trials have
  A systematic review evaluated the effects of preopera- demonstrated that cessation of smoking is associated with
tive exercise therapy on postoperative complications and marked reductions in postoperative complications [39–42].
length of stay in surgery of all types [31]. In patients The duration of smoking cessation seems to be equally
undergoing cardiac and abdominal surgery, meta-analysis important, with a systematic review and meta-analysis
indicated that prehabilitation led to reduced complication reporting that the treatment effect was signiﬁcantly larger
rates and length of stay. The applicability of these studies in trials with smoking cessation of at least 4 weeks [36].
to patients undergoing bariatric surgery is questionable. Although not studied speciﬁcally in patients undergoing
  A  more recent systematic review looked at 8 RCTs  bariatric surgery, there are no data to suggest that either the
investigating the effect of preoperative exercise on car- increased risk associated with smoking or the effect of
diorespiratory function and recovery after multiple types of smoking cessation should be different in this category of
surgery [32] and concluded that there was limited evidence patients.
demonstrating physiological improvement with prehabili- Hazardous drinking, deﬁned as intake of three alcohol
tation. In addition, there was little correlation between equivalents (12 g ethanol each) or more per day, has long
improvement in physiological status and clinical outcomes. been identiﬁed as a risk factor for postoperative compli-
  A reanalysis [33] of the data from an original RCT of cations [43–45]. A large retrospective study comprising
two  prehabilitation methods showed that those who   [300 000 patients undergoing elective surgery (including

                                                                                               123


2070                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

bariatric surgery) reported that consumption of [2 alcohol a recent systematic review and meta-analysis [59]of11
equivalents/day within 2 weeks of surgery was an inde- RCTs of moderate quality addressing the effect of gluco-
pendent predictor of pneumonia, sepsis, wound infection/ corticoids on postoperative outcome, they were found to
disruption and length of hospital stay [44]. Alcohol absti- decrease complication rates and LOS. No effect was found
nence for one month has been associated with better out- for overall complications or anastomotic leakage in col-
come after colorectal surgery [46]. ERAS guidelines for orectal surgery [59]. A minimum dose of 2.5–5 mg dex-
colonic surgery, therefore, recommend alcohol cessation amethasone given 90 min prior to induction of anaesthesia
4 weeks prior to surgery. However, due to the need for is necessary to achieve the effect on PONV [60–62].
behavioural changes associated with bariatric surgery in Data from studies including patients undergoing bar-
combination with the increased risk of alcohol dependence iatric surgery are relatively sparse. In one retrospective
after gastric bypass surgery [47], 1–2 years of alcohol analysis of 2000 consecutive patients undergoing outpa-
abstinence is usually considered mandatory in patients with tient laparoscopic gastric bypass, a steroid bolus was
earlier overconsumption. The evidence for this recom- identiﬁed as a predictor of successful discharge within 24 h
mendation is, however, still to be established.      [63].
                                                        In two meta-analyses, no adverse effects were identiﬁed
Preoperative weight loss                             with the use of a single dose of glucocorticoids [59, 64]. As
                                                     glucocorticoids can cause hyperglycaemia, which is asso-
A preoperative low-calorie diet (LCD, 1000–1200 kcal/d) ciated with increased postoperative, especially infective,
or very low-calorie diet (VLCD approx. 800 kcal/d) for complications [65], blood glucose should be monitored
2-4 weeks is usually recommended in bariatric centres. intra- and postoperatively in patients undergoing bariatric
This has been shown to reduce liver volume by 16–20 % surgery, particularly if glucocorticoids are administered.
[48, 49] and the surgeon’s perceived complexity of the
procedure [50]. In a systematic review of 11 non-ran- Preoperative fasting
domised studies, preoperative weight loss was associated
with  a   reduction in  postoperative complications  Recent studies have demonstrated no differences in resid-
(18.8 ± 10.6 vs. 21.4 ± 13.1 %, p = 0.02) [51]. This ual gastric ﬂuid volume (RGFV), pH [66, 67] or gastric
ﬁnding was also conﬁrmed in a multicentre RCT (5.8 vs. emptying rates following semi-solid meals [68, 69]or
13.2 %, p = 0.04) [50] as well as in a study comprising drinks [70] in obese and lean patients. No differences were
over 22,000 patients from the Scandinavian Obesity Reg- found in RGFV and pH in a randomised study of morbidly
istry [52]. There are no data from studies evaluating dif- obese patients who drank 300 ml of clear ﬂuid 2 h before
ferences between patients with or without diabetes in terms induction of anaesthesia, compared with those who fasted
of effect of preoperative weight loss on postoperative from midnight [71, 72]. RGFV and pH were also similar
complications.                                       following an overnight fast in obese diabetic patients (with
  Recent systematic reviews reported mandatory weight and without autonomic neuropathy) and non-diabetic con-
loss prior to surgery to be the only factor associated posi- trols [72–74]. Presently, anaesthesia societies recommend
tively with postoperative weight loss [51, 53]. In a recent intake of clear ﬂuids up to 2 h and solids 6 h before
registry study including [9000  patients undergoing  induction of anaesthesia in healthy [75, 76] and obese [76]
laparoscopic gastric bypass, preoperative weight reduction patients.
was associated with improved weight loss after 2 years.
Moreover, this effect was more pronounced in patients with Carbohydrate loading
high BMI ([45.7 kg/m2)[54].
  In patients with type 2 diabetes on glucose-lowering Preoperative carbohydrate conditioning, using iso-osmolar
drugs, low-caloric intake in combination with unchanged drinks ingested 2–3 h before induction of anaesthesia,
medication may induce hypoglycaemia. Evidence-based  attenuated development of postoperative insulin resistance,
guidelines for these situations are lacking, but some rec- reduced postoperative nitrogen and protein losses and
ommendations are available [55].                     maintained lean body mass [77]. Recent meta-analyses [78,
                                                     79] demonstrated preoperative conditioning using carbo-
Glucocorticoids                                      hydrate drinks to be associated with signiﬁcant reduction in
                                                     length of hospital stay by about 1 day in patients under-
Glucocorticoids have anti-inﬂammatory properties and going major abdominal surgery. When ‘preoperative’ car-
have therefore been used in elective surgery to reduce the bohydrate conditioning drinks were administered to
stress response [56, 57]. They have also been used to patients with type II diabetes (mean BMI 28.6 kg/m2), no
reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) [58]. In differences were noted in gastric emptying times compared
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                   2071

with healthy subjects [80]. However, postprandial glucose management paradigms are based on studies of liberal
concentrations reached a higher peak and were elevated for versus restrictive strategies in non-obese patients whereby
longer in patients with diabetes, returning to baseline after ﬂuid excess or ‘imbalance’ resulted in worsened outcomes
180 min  [80]. In addition, preoperative carbohydrate than maintaining ‘ﬂuid balance’ [88, 89]. In morbidly
ingestion did not lead to an increase in aspiration-related obese patients, data from non-randomised studies [90–93]
complications in patients undergoing laparoscopic gastric support ‘liberal’ ﬂuid regimens which were associated with
bypass [81]. Two further studies have used these drinks in reduced occurrence of RML (up to 4–5 L crystalloid during
bariatric surgery within an enhanced recovery pathway [82, a 2–3 h operation [90]), reduced postoperative nausea and
83]. In the only randomised study comparing enhanced vomiting (25 ml/kg which in this study equated to a mean
recovery versus standard care in bariatric patients (la- ±SD 3209 ± 1123 versus 2737 ± 828 ml administered
paroscopic sleeve gastrectomy), no differences in overall intraoperatively) [92], postoperative ARF (4-5L crystalloid
complications were noted between the groups [82]. How- for a 2 h operation [93]) and shortened hospital stay (7 ml/
ever, it was of note that compliance with preoperative kg/h which in this study equated to[1750 ml administered
carbohydrate conditioning was only 15 % in the enhanced intraoperatively) [94]. In more conservative intraoperative
recovery group [82].                                 ﬂuid regimens (15 ml/kg), there were no differences in
                                                     postoperative RML following laparoscopic bariatric sur-
Intraoperative interventions                         gery compared to more liberal strategies (40 ml/kg) [95].
                                                     No differences in intraoperative urine output were noted
Perioperative ﬂuid management                        when morbidly obese patients were randomised to intra-
                                                     operative low (4 ml/kg/h) vs high (10 ml/kg/h) volumes of
Perioperative ﬂuid management and accurate assessment of Ringer’s lactate [96]. Functional parameters, such as stroke
volume status in morbidly obese patients are a challenge. volume variation (SVV)-guided intraoperative ﬂuid ther-
Reasons for this include physiological differences, the apy, enabled maintenance of haemodynamic parameters
presence of multiple comorbidities (and associated poly- with lower infusion volumes in patients undergoing
pharmacy), inaccuracies associated with use of non-inva- laparoscopic bariatric surgery [97]. The enteral route for
sive monitoring and higher incidence of rhabdomyolysis ﬂuid and nutrition should be used preferentially and
(RML) postoperatively [84]. Additionally, liver-shrinking numerous bariatric series have demonstrated that this is
diets, employed for 2–3 weeks preoperatively, may result possible on the ﬁrst postoperative day [63, 98].
in acute nutritional, electrolyte and ﬂuid deﬁcits [85].
While total blood volume is increased in obese patients, Anaesthesia
obese have a reduced blood volume on a volume/weight
basis compared with non-obese patients (50 ml/kg com- In this section, information is focused on details of par-
pared with 75 ml/kg) [86].                           ticular relevance in the bariatric setting. For general
  In bariatric surgery, RML rates of 5–77 % were reported anaesthetic considerations in gastrointestinal surgery
(deﬁned by elevation of serum creatine kinase (CK) of within an ERAS pathway, see Ref. [99].
C1000 IU/L) (although 65 % of these procedures were
performed by laparotomy) [84]. Of those with RML, the Postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis Bariatric
overall incidence of renal failure was 14 % and mortality patients are frequently \50 years of age, female and non-
3 %. Risk factors for RML identiﬁed in a meta-analysis smokers undergoing laparoscopic procedures of more than
were male sex, BMI [52 kg/m2 and operation time [4h  one hour in duration, and receive postoperative opioid
[84]. Overall, postoperative Acute Renal Failure (ARF, analgesia, all of which are risk factors for PONV [100].
deﬁned by the study authors [87] as a rise in serum crea- Additionally, a history of PONV or motion sickness, as
tinine [1.4 mg/dL ([124 lmol/l) at any time during the well as the use of volatile anaesthetic increases the risk of
inpatient stay, with an increase of serum creatinine of PONV [100].
[0.3 mg/dL ([26 lmol/l) from the baseline value during  Recent guidelines for the management of PONV rec-
the ﬁrst postoperative week) has been reported in 2 % of ommend a multimodal approach by reducing the baseline
patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery [87]. risk with the use of antiemetics according to patient risk
Occurrence of intraoperative hypotension was amongst factors [101]. Recommended strategies include Propofol
nine predisposing risk factors identiﬁed on multivariate for induction and maintenance of anaesthesia, avoidance of
analysis. Presence of preoperative renal insufﬁciency volatile anaesthetics, minimisation of intra- and postoper-
placed patients at greatest risk for postoperative ARF [87]. ative opioids and avoidance of ﬂuid overload [101]. A
  Few data from RCTs allow guiding perioperative ﬂuid recent RCT comparing opioid-free TIVA with volatile-
therapy in  morbidly  obese  patients. Present ﬂuid  opioid  anaesthesia in bariatric surgery, reported a
                                                                                               123


2072                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

signiﬁcantly lower rate and severity of PONV in the opi- between volume control and pressure control modes of
oid-free TIVA group [102]. In addition to this baseline risk mandatory ventilation [119]. Concurrent use of positive
reduction, the recommended antiemetics for PONV pro- end expiratory pressure (PEEP) and recruitment improved
phylaxis are 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonists, intraoperative oxygenation and pulmonary mechanics. In a
corticosteroids, butyrophenones, neurokinin-1 receptor wider surgical population, adoption of the other elements
antagonists, antihistamines and anticholinergics. The use of of lung protective ventilation (LPV) was associated with
a combination of antiemetics in bariatric surgery is sup- signiﬁcant reduction in postoperative complications [120].
ported by a randomised trial demonstrating the superiority Patient positioning affects pulmonary function peri-
of triple combination of haloperidol, dexamethasone and operatively [121]. The ‘‘beach chair’’ and ‘‘leg ﬂexion
ondansetron over a single or double combination in   position’’ have been demonstrated to be superior to
laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy [103].               straight, supine position regardless of Trendelenburg
                                                     angle. These pulmonary effects are most marked in the
Anaesthetic maintenance Various volatile agents have absence of the intraoperative pneumoperitoneum [122].
been compared in the bariatric population. The results are However, they may have negative inﬂuence on surgical
inconsistent, but in general favour the use of shorter acting, access with consequent need of increased insufﬂation
lower absorption agents that may offer small advantages in pressures [123].
emergence and functional recovery times [104–107].
  No   prospective comparisons of intravenous versus Neuromuscular blockade  Deep Block: Higher pressure
volatile anaesthetic technique were identiﬁed in bariatric pneumoperitoneum, to facilitate laparoscopic surgery, can
surgery. A consistent ﬁnding is that early PONV is   have  deleterious cardiovascular effects and increased
increased with volatile agents compared to Propofol target depth of neuromuscular blockade may improve surgical
controlled infusion. This effect is particularly marked in conditions, without the need to increase insufﬂation
patients at high risk of PONV [108].                 pressure.
  Utilisation of short-acting agents and opioid minimisation Data from small trials in non-bariatric surgery suggest
within a wider ERAS regimen appears to reduce costs, com- that deep blockade may facilitate manoeuvrability during
plication rates and length of stay in other specialities [28]. The laparoscopic procedures [124, 125]. Although this may be
current evidence does not allow recommendation of speciﬁc extrapolated to bariatric procedures, results from prospec-
anaesthetic agents or techniques in bariatric surgery. tive trials have yet to be reported [126].
                                                        Residual Blockade: The effect of the extent of residual
Airway management   The airway of bariatric patients can depth of neuromuscular blockade in the recovery period
present speciﬁc challenges. Bag and mask ventilation has has been studied extensively [127–129], although not
been demonstrated to be difﬁcult in up to 15 % of patients speciﬁc in bariatric surgery. However, many of the physi-
with higher BMI [109, 110].                          ological ﬁndings may have increased relevance to the
  Endotracheal intubation remains the reference standard bariatric population, e.g. diminished airway/pharyngeal
in obese patients. Correct sizing of endotracheal tube may tone, airway diameter, dysfunctional swallow and aspira-
have impact on micro-aspiration and postoperative com- tion defenses.
plications. Little literature currently exists to recommend There is evidence to suggest that a nerve-stimulated
routine adoption of supraglottic devices [111].      train of four (TOF) ratio of 0.9 translates into recovery
  A Cochrane review was unable to differentiate between beneﬁts [130, 131]. Trials in different healthcare settings
the efﬁcacy of direct and indirect ﬁbre-optic mechanisms have shown an association between residual blockade and
of tracheal tube placement [112]. However, adoption of a post anaesthesia care unit (PACU) pulmonary complica-
speciﬁc ramped position for direct laryngoscopy in the tions [132, 133]. Reductions in PACU discharge time
population with high BMI can reduce the incidence of associated with TOF ratio [0.9 have been demonstrated
difﬁculty [113].                                     [134]. A higher level of neuromuscular function was also
                                                     associated with patient perceived satisfaction with the
Ventilation strategies The effects of intraoperative inter- quality of recovery [135].
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) regimens on An early systematic review comparing recovery of
physiological variables are reported in bariatric patients neuromuscular function with acetylcholine esterase inhi-
[114–118]. Currently, the translation of these data into bition versus selective cyclodextrin binding (sugammadex)
effects on postoperative pulmonary complications and out- suggested an equivalent side effect proﬁle [136]. The use of
comes is lacking for the bariatric population.       binding agents is supported in bariatric surgery [137–140]
  A 2012 systematic review and meta-analysis on venti- where predictability of complete neuromuscular recovery
lation in bariatric patients did not identify any beneﬁt within short time is important.
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                   2073

Laparoscopy                                          postoperative leakage varied between 0 and 94 %, and the
                                                     efﬁcacy of drainage for the non-operative treatment of leakage
Laparoscopic bariatric surgery has rapidly superseded open was between 12.5 and 100 % [152]. Only one study reported
surgery [141]. Three RCTs including  more than  50   data about non-operative treatment of leakage without drai-
patients, compared open with laparoscopic gastric bypass nage, which was pursued in one out of three patients [153].
[142–144]. The main ﬁndings were signiﬁcantly shorter However, there are no RCTs evaluating the role and efﬁcacy
hospital stay [142–144] as well as reduced rate of inci- of prophylactic abdominal drainage following bariatric sur-
sional hernia [142, 143] favouring laparoscopy. Further gery. A recent retrospective study on laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
beneﬁcial effects like reduction in intraoperative blood loss gastric bypass compared an historical group of 272 patients
[143], diminution of postoperative pain [144] and earlier with routine drain and 483 without [153]. The leakage and
recovery [143] were also shown. None of these studies reoperation rates were similar.
found any difference in terms of weight loss. However, due In one RCT including both subtotal and total gastrec-
to  decreased  postoperative adhesions, laparoscopic tomy with D2 lymph node dissection for gastric cancer,
approach may be associated with increased rates of internal there was no signiﬁcant difference between the groups with
herniation [145, 146].                               or without drainage in the incidence of intra-abdominal
  Higher costs of laparoscopic surgery are compensated abscess, wound infection or pneumonia [154].
for by fewer postoperative complications and shorter hos- Despite lack of evidence in bariatric surgery, systematic
pitalisation time [147]. The use of robotic surgery has also use of abdominal drainage might be unnecessary, as
been described in bariatric surgery. A recently published demonstrated in other various types of gastrointestinal
systematic review included results from 2 557 patients surgery [155].
found similar overall major and minor complications
between robotic and laparoscopic groups, but the costs for Postoperative interventions
robotic gastric bypass were higher [148].
                                                     Postoperative analgesia
Nasogastric tube
                                                     Respiratory function is compromised after bariatric sur-
A  Cochrane meta-analysis concluded that routine naso- gery: obesity induces severe restrictive syndrome and lying
gastric intubation following open abdominal surgery  ﬂat can induce atelectasis. Sedative drugs used during and
should be abandoned in favour of selective use [149]. A after anaesthesia promote obstruction of the upper airways
subgroup analysis of 9 RCTs including 1085 patients that which might induce postoperative hypoxaemia [156]. Thus,
underwent gastro-duodenal surgery found increased pul- postoperative analgesia in bariatric surgery is based on two
monary complication associated with routine use of post- strategies.
operative nasogastric tube.
  The role of nasogastric tubes in bariatric surgery was Multimodal systemic analgesia Multimodal pain man-
speciﬁcally addressed in a retrospective cohort study of agement strategies should be used when possible to reduce
1067 gastric bypass patients [150]. There was no difference the consumption of narcotics [157]. Non-opioid analgesics,
in complication rates between patients with or without such as intravenous acetaminophen (paracetamol) and non-
postoperative nasogastric tube. In a meta-analysis of steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be
patients with gastrectomy for gastric cancer, time to oral used systematically [158]. Dosage should be adapted
diet was signiﬁcantly shorter in patients without nasogas- according to ideal body weight [157]. Other drugs, like
tric/jejunal decompression [151]. The rate of anastomotic pregabalin, have been studied but evidence for its efﬁcacy
leakage and the number of pulmonary complications were is still awaited [159]. Current results on the use of
similar.                                             dexmedetomidine do not allow recommending its routine
  As routine postoperative nasogastric intubation has not use [160]. If opioids become necessary, patient-controlled
been proven to protect against complications like leakage, analgesia with increased refractory period between boluses
and even increases pulmonary infection risk and time to rather than continuous infusion is recommended, in par-
recovery, nasogastric tubes placed during surgery should ticular for patients with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
be removed before reversal of anaesthesia.           [161]. For opioids, the enteral route should be used as early
                                                     as possible. Surveillance must continue in the postoperative
Abdominal drainage                                   phase [162].

In a systematic review on the role of drainage after Roux-en-Y Nerve block and inﬁltration Wound inﬁltration with local
gastric bypass, the sensitivity of drainage in detecting anaesthetics has been used with success in laparoscopic
                                                                                               123


2074                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

surgery, particularly in cholecystectomy, colorectal and However, LMWH   has a number of advantages over
gynaecological surgery, but there are no speciﬁc studies in UFH, including a more predictable dose response,
bariatric surgery [163]. RCTs and meta-analyses have increased bioavailability and longer plasma half-life after
demonstrated the safety of local anaesthetic aerosolisation subcutaneous injection, allowing once-daily dosing.
techniques in laparoscopic surgery [164]. It may be com- LMWH also reduces the risk of heparin-related side
bined with pre-incision inﬁltration [165]. Efﬁcacy of its use effects, such as thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis, with
has also been demonstrated in bariatric surgery [166] and long-term use [180].
ropivacaine or levobupivacaine seem to be more effective The ﬁrst injection should be administered 8–12 h after
than short-acting agents, like lidocaine [167]. Recently, it surgery [181]. There are no data supporting an injection
was reported that ultrasound-guided transversus abdominal twice a day for prophylaxis. However, an increased dose
plane block is feasible and safe in bariatric surgery [168] adjusted to BMI (i.e. 6000 u of enoxaparin for BMI
but data from RCTs comparing this technique with local [30 kg/m2, 8000 u for BMI[40 kg/m2, 10,000 u for BMI
anaesthetic inﬁltration are lacking.                 [50 kg/m2) has been shown to be safe without increased
  Thoracic  epidural analgesia (TEA) improves lung   risk of bleeding [182–184]. Finally, many studies indicate
function and hastens recovery of spirometric values in prolonged risk of thrombotic events, not least due to
obese patients following laparotomy [169] but there is no unpredictable food intake in some patients, encouraging
consensus for laparoscopic surgery. A recent study in recommendation of 3–4 weeks treatment [185, 186]. There
laparoscopic colorectal surgery suggested that the use of are no data suggesting that the use of fondaparinux or other
TEA  did not improve outcome or respiratory function, new oral anticoagulants should be recommended.
compared with patient-controlled analgesia [170]. A ret- Treatment with vitamin K antagonists should be stopped
rospective study in open gastric bypass patients concluded 5 days before and resumed 12–24 h after surgery in com-
that intravenous morphine was an acceptable strategy for bination with ‘‘bridging’’ LMWH [178].
postoperative analgesia, and did not result in more adverse For patients who cannot receive anticoagulant treatment,
events or poor outcome compared   with TEA   [171].  the use of retrievable vena cava ﬁlters has been evaluated.
Moreover, application of TEA may be complicated in   Many adverse events have been reported and since con-
obese patients. Surprisingly, TEA was reported to be vincing evidence for its efﬁcacy is lacking [187–189], the
associated with a four-fold higher risk of wound infection use of such devices in current practice is not recommended.
in patients undergoing open gastric bypass.
                                                     Postoperative nutrition
Thromboprophylaxis
                                                     Prior to bariatric surgery, all patients should undergo an
In many studies, thromboembolic complications represent appropriate nutritional evaluation, including selective
the main cause of morbidity and 50 % of mortality after micronutrient measurements. In comparison with purely
bariatric surgery [172–174]. Risk factors, in addition to restrictive procedures, more extensive perioperative nutri-
obesity itself, include history of venous thromboembolism, tional evaluations are required for gastric bypass and even
increased age, smoking, varicose veins, heart or respiratory more ‘‘aggressive’’ malabsorptive procedures such as bil-
failure, OSA, thrombophilia and oestrogen oral contra- iopancreatic diversion [190].
ception [175].
  Although not shown to reduce the incidence of fatal Early postoperative nutritional care Nutritional and meal
pulmonary embolism [176], mechanical methods such as planning guidance should be provided to patient and family
intermittent pneumatic compression or graduated com- before bariatric surgery and during the postoperative hos-
pression stockings should be used. Moreover, early   pital course and reinforced at subsequent outpatient visits.
mobilisation and the use of calf-length compression  A  clear liquid meal regimen can usually be initiated a
stockings were associated, with a low incidence of deep couple of hours postoperatively. A consultation should be
venous thromboembolism  in a study of 280 bariatric  provided with a dietician and a protocol-derived staged
patients [177].                                      meal progression, based on the type of surgical procedure,
  Bariatric surgery patients are at least at moderate risk of should be adhered to.
thromboembolism  and, therefore, mechanical methods     Patients should adhere to a plan of multiple small meals
should be combined with pharmacological prophylaxis. each day, chewing their food thoroughly without drinking
Many studies [172, 178] also in bariatric surgery [179] beverages at the same time.
have compared low molecular weight heparins (LMWH)      The balanced meal plan should include more than ﬁve
with unfractionated heparin (UFH), without demonstrating servings of fruits and vegetables daily for optimal ﬁbre
any difference in efﬁciency or adverse events.       consumption, colonic function and phytochemical intake.
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                   2075

  Protein malnutrition causes an annual hospitalisation A Cochrane review evaluated preoperative incentive
rate of 1 % per year after malabsorptive procedures and spirometry and failed to show any beneﬁt in preventing
leads to signiﬁcant morbidity [191]. Protein intake should postoperative pulmonary complications [203]. Therefore,
average 60–120 g daily. Concentrated sweets should be routine perioperative use of incentive spirometry for
avoided after any bariatric procedure to reduce caloric improving oxygenation is not recommended. In open sur-
intake and in particular after gastric bypass to minimise gery, use of congruent epidural analgesia (epidural inser-
symptoms of dumping.                                 tion site corresponding to dermatomes of surgical incision)
  Minimal nutritional supplementation includes 1–2 adult with local anaesthetics has been shown to improve post-
multivitamin-mineral supplements  containing  iron,  operative oxygenation [204].
1200–1500 mg/d of calcium and vitamin B12 preparation   Despite normal pulse oximetry values, immediate post-
[192].                                               operative tissue oxygen saturation has been shown to be
  Fluids should be consumed slowly and in sufﬁcient  lower in obese patients [205]. Although tissue oxygen
amounts to maintain adequate hydration (more than 1.5 L saturation and pulmonary function have been reported to
daily) [193]. Clinical and biochemical monitoring is rec- return to normal within the ﬁrst 24 h after surgery, there is
ommended for micro- and macro-nutritional deﬁciencies, not enough evidence to recommend a minimum duration of
particularly for iron, vitamin B12, calcium and folic acids oxygen supplementation. Thus, the use and the duration of
deﬁciencies [194].                                   postoperative oxygen supplementation need to be individ-
                                                     ualised. Postoperative positioning in head-elevated, semi-
Management of diabetes mellitus and lipids Postopera- sitting or prone position (if feasible) further prevents pul-
tive glycaemic control should aim at achieving HbA1c of monary atelectasis [202]. Any postoperative sign of
62 mmol/mol or less with fasting blood glucose B110 mg/ insufﬁcient ventilation such as arterial desaturation,
dl (6.1 mmol/l) and postprandial glucose B180 mg/dl  tachypnoea, unexplained tachycardia or hypercarbia should
(10 mmol/l) [195]. Although this is higher compared with prompt the use of positive pressure ventilation.
usual recommendations by, for example, The American
                                                     b)  Obese patients with OSA
Diabetes Association in non-morbidly obese patients, this
degree of glucose control has been shown to be realistic There is strong evidence to support a high predictive
and achievable after bariatric surgery [195]. Physicians and value of the STOP-BANG questionnaire for preoperative
ward nurses should be familiar with glycaemic targets and screening of OSA [206]. Patients with moderate to high
insulin protocols as well as the use of dextrose-free IV risk should be considered for positive airway pressure
ﬂuids and low-sugar liquid supplements [196]. Obese  support postoperatively. High vigilance for the need of
patients with type 1 diabetes should receive scheduled postoperative positive pressure support is recommended in
insulin therapy during their hospital stay. Cessation of these patients, in addition to routine oxygen supplementa-
insulin treatment is often possible early after bariatric tion. These patients should have at least continuous pulse
surgery, while liberal continuation of treatment with met- oximetry [207] and respiratory rate monitoring. A meta-
formin is usually recommended [197]. Lipid abnormalities analysis concluded that oxygen therapy improves oxygen
should be treated according to the National Cholesterol saturation signiﬁcantly in patients with OSA [208]. How-
Educational Program  (NCEP) guidelines [198]. Any    ever, it may also increase the duration of apnoea-hypop-
existing lipid-lowering therapy for LDL-cholesterol and noea events and should, therefore, be used carefully. The
triglyceride values should be continued after surgery if American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommends care-
levels remain above desired goals [199, 200].        ful attention during the ﬁrst 24 h after surgery in patients
                                                     with presumed OSA and also suggests that opioid based
                                                     patient-controlled analgesia should be avoided [209].
Postoperative oxygenation
                                                     Patients should be discharged from PACU when clinical
                                                     evaluation is satisfactory and they are fully conscious/ori-
a)  Obese  patients without obstructive sleep apnoea
                                                     ented with adequate respiratory rate and depth.
    (OSA)
Obesity is associated with increased gastric and oesopha- Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation
geal pressures (promoting aspiration), along with reduced
FRC and ERV, that increases the work of breathing [201]. Non-invasive positive pressure (NIPP) support includes
After surgery, atelectasis has been found to persist for a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), non-invasive
longer time in morbidly obese compared with normal   ventilation and bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP).
weight patients [202]; thus, all obese patients should be Patients with OSA often beneﬁt more from positive pres-
considered as high risk irrespective in the presence of OSA. sure support compared with oxygen therapy alone [210].
                                                                                               123


2076                                                                         World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

Data from  two recent meta-analyses demonstrate that adhered to according to the above criteria as well as in the

higher FiO2s might actually increase the risk of apnoea/ presence of tachypnoea or hypercarbia.
hypopnoea in morbidly obese patients postoperatively
                                                     c)  Obese patients with OSA on home CPAP therapy.
[211]. It is, therefore, recommended that CPAP (beginning
from 5 to 7.5 cm of water) should be used in preference to Compliance with CPAP has been reported to be poor,
oxygen therapy alone, in particular in patients with OSA ranging from 50 to 80 % [222]. However, patients pre-
and signs of respiratory deterioration.              scribed CPAP habitually should continue their treatment in
  Several retrospective analyses evaluating prophylactic the postoperative period since it decreases complication
CPAP use have not demonstrated a clear beneﬁt in oxy- rates [223]. Based on data from retrospective studies,
genation [212, 213]. ‘‘Super obese’’ patients (BMI[60 kg/ slightly higher CPAP values than prescribed for home use
m2), with complications requiring reoperation may be may be needed in the postoperative period, due to respi-
considered for prophylactic CPAP as these patients often ratory inhibitory effects of perioperative narcotics and
need prolonged respiratory support [214]. There is a lack of muscle relaxants [224].
available evidence to support the use of BiPAP over CPAP
                                                     d)  Patients with Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
in patients without Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome
                                                         (OHS) (‘‘Pickwickian syndrome’’)
(OHS, see below) or patients with elevated pCO2 levels.
The need of CPAP has been shown to be reduced after     OHS is deﬁned as severely obese patients with baseline
laparoscopic compared with open procedures [215].    awake hypoxia and hypercarbia along with raised serum
  In terms of requirement for postoperative CPAP/NIV, bicarbonate ([27 mmol/l). Patients with OHS are at high
obese patients can be divided into the following subsets: risk of perioperative complications [225]. OHS patients are
                                                     highly sensitive to opioids irrespective of route of admin-
a)  Obese patients without diagnosed OSA.
                                                     istration (intravenous/central neuraxial) and might present
  These patients beneﬁt from oxygen therapy (via face- with sustained and life threatening respiratory depression
mask or nasal cannula), upright positioning and early in the postoperative period [226]. Opioid-free anaesthesia
ambulation. Retrospective analyses have shown that a with a preference of regional anaesthesia (using local
diagnosis of OSA is often missed in many bariatric surgical anaesthetics) and the use of minimally invasive procedures
patients [216] and this subset of patients is at high risk to is recommended. Prophylactic nasal BiPAP/NIV for
develop postoperative complications [217]. In patients with 24–48 h postoperatively has been shown to reduce risk of
BMI  [35 kg/m2 the use of nasal CPAP postoperatively respiratory complications [227]. At least, prophylactic
might be an alternative due to higher tolerance/compliance, initiation of BiPAP in sitting/semi-sitting position along
however its therapeutic efﬁcacy may be limited by oral air with intensive monitoring for ﬁrst 24 h is recommended in
leaks [218].                                         these patients.
b)  Patients with OSA-not using  preoperative CPAP
    therapy.
                                                     Summary and conclusion
  Two subgroups of patients are included in this category:
patients with diagnosed OSA without prescribed CPAP, ERAS versus traditional care in bariatric surgery:
and patients with prescribed CPAP but who do not use it clinical outcomes
regularly (poor compliance). The severity of OSA could be
expected to be worse in the latter group who are candidates For bariatric surgery, the literature supporting the use of
needing CPAP in the immediate postoperative period.  ERAS is comparatively sparse. Although not deﬁned as a
However, in both groups intraoperative anaesthetic and regular ERAS program, McCarty and collaborators repor-
surgical factors play the most important role for the need ted improved postoperative recovery in 2000 consecutive
for positive pressure ventilatory support due to worsening patients undergoing laparoscopic RYGB with a standard-
of OSA. Regional anaesthesia and short-acting anaesthetic ised multimodal program aimed to modify perioperative
drugs should be used [219]. Patient-related factors indi- care [63]. So far, there is one single RCT published in
cating increased need for NIPP use include moderate to which the use of a standardised ERAS programme in
severe OSA  [211], male gender, age [50 years, BMI   patients undergoing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy was
[60 kg/m2  [220], pulmonary co-morbidity, open surgery compared with ‘‘standard care’’. The authors reported
[221] and the need for reoperation [214]. An oxygen sat- shorter hospital stay with ERAS but no differences in
uration below 90 % in the immediate postoperative period readmission rates, postoperative complications or fatigue
is usually deﬁned as hypoxia and indicates need for NIPP scores [82]. In general, most data reporting beneﬁcial
[217]. Liberal use of NIPP therapy should, therefore, be effects associated with ERAS are generated from studies
123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                   2077

involving elderly, sometimes medically frail patients, challenged and updated, probably within 3- to 5-years
whereas individuals submitted to bariatric surgery are interval. It might seem to the reader that the level of evi-
typically younger and more physically ﬁt. Therefore, dence for many of the elements is surprisingly low. How-
results from previous studies may not be immediately ever, it should be acknowledged that this reﬂects the
applicable to bariatric surgery. Morbidity and mortality current situation in most areas of modern medicine in
rates in association with bariatric surgery are relatively low general and not least within surgical practice.
with 3 and 0.04 % for severe complications and mortality,
respectively, within 30 days as reported in the Scandina- Acknowledgments The authors thank Professor Karem Slim, Ser-
vian Obesity Registry (SOReg) [3], and further reductions vice de Chirurgie Digestive & Unite´ de Chirurgie Ambulato-
                                                     ries, CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France for his preliminary
in these may be difﬁcult to achieve.                 work on the manuscript.
  It could be assumed that for some ERAS elements, such
as early mobilisation and oral intake, adherence is rela- Funding Financial support was provided through the Erling-Pers-
tively high in most centres, whereas there may be room for son Family Foundation and through the regional agreement on
                                                     medical training and clinical research between Stockholm County
improvement for others, such as postoperative oxygenation Council and Karolinska Institutet (AT). The ERAS society has sup-
and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation. Since the port from Nutricia Research via an unrestricted educational grant.
recommendation grade for the use of most of the included
ERAS elements for obese individuals undergoing surgery Compliance with Ethical Standards
in general is strong, the use of systematic ERAS pathway Conﬂict of Interests AT and MV have no conﬂicts of interest to
may have the potential to improve outcomes after bariatric declare. ADM has no direct conﬂicts of interest to declare. He has
surgery.                                             received speakers’ honoraria from Covidien. DR has no direct conﬂict
                                                     of interest to declare. SA has no direct conﬂicts of interest to declare.
                                                     He has received speakers’ honoraria and consultation fees from Fis-
Future perspectives and validation                   cher & Paykel Healthcare, Merck Sharp & Dohme and BBraun;
                                                     unrestricted educational grants from Fresenius Kabi, Nestle Nutrition,
Data from studies evaluating the effects of ERAS pathways Covidien, Ethicon EndoSurgery, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Fischer &
and health costs in patients undergoing bariatric surgery are Paykel Healthcare, GORE and BBraun. He has also completed a
                                                     bariatric fellowship funded via an educational grant from Ethicon
sparse. Some studies in colorectal [228] and pancreatic EndoSurgery (paid to the institution). ND has no direct conﬂicts of
[229] surgery reported reduced costs with ERAS, whereas interest to declare. He has received unrestricted grants and speakers’
others could not identify any difference [230]. For bariatric honoraria from Johnson & Johnson, Nestle´ and from MSD. DNL has
surgery and ERAS, reports on quality of life (QOL) are still no direct conﬂicts of interest to declare. He has received unrestricted
                                                     grants and speakers’ honoraria from Fresenius Kabi, BBraun, Nutricia
due and the very few studies reporting data in colorectal and Baxter Healthcare.
surgery have failed to demonstrate any difference [230,
231]. Possible explanations for this might be difﬁculties
associated with randomisation between ERAS and con-  References
ventional care and/or lack of instruments with sufﬁcient
                                                       1. Buchwald H, Oien DM (2013) Metabolic/bariatric surgery
sensitivity to detect any possible improvements in patients’ worldwide 2011. Obes Surg 23:427–436
perceived QOL. Nevertheless, QOL and cost will be key  2. Dindo D, Demartines N, Clavien PA (2004) Classiﬁcation of
elements in evaluating the success of ERAS in the bariatric surgical complications: a new proposal with evaluation in a
setting in the future. Implementation and validation of  cohort of 6336 patients and results of a survey. Ann Surg
                                                         240:205–213
guidelines like the present one are also important factors 3. SOReg—Scandinavian Obesity Surgery registry Annual Report
for improvement of outcome. Therefore, the   teams       (2013), Annual Report http://ucr.uu.se/soreg
involved in these guidelines will include the recommen- 4. National Bariatric Surgery Registry of the British Obesity &
dations into a web-based ERASÒ database for continuous   Metabolic Sugery Society (2014). http://nbsr.co.uk/2014-report
                                                       5. Fearon KC, Ljungqvist O, Von Meyenfeldt M et al (2005)
audit and analysis, which will help validate the guidelines Enhanced recovery after surgery: a consensus review of clinical
in clinical practice.                                    care for patients undergoing colonic resection. Clin Nutr
                                                         24:466–477
                                                       6. Basse L, Hjort Jakobsen D, Billesbolle P et al (2000) A clinical
                                                         pathway to accelerate recovery after colonic resection. Ann Surg
Comment                                                  232:51–57
                                                       7. Basse L, Raskov HH, Hjort Jakobsen D et al (2002) Accelerated
These guidelines represent an effort to provide all care- postoperative recovery programme after colonic resection
givers involved in the management of patients undergoing improves physical performance, pulmonary function and body
                                                         composition. Br J Surg 89:446–453
bariatric surgery with an overview of the current literature. 8. Wind J, Hoﬂand J, Preckel B et al (2006) Perioperative strategy
Surgical and anaesthesiological practice is continuously in colonic surgery; LAparoscopy and/or FAst track multimodal
developing, which means that recommendations need to be  management versus standard care (LAFA trial). BMC Surg 6:16
                                                                                               123


2078                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

  9. Khoo CK, Vickery CJ, Forsyth N et al (2007) A prospective   recovery after surgery (ERASÒ) society recommendations. Clin
    randomized controlled trial of multimodal perioperative man- Nutr 31:783–800
    agement protocol in patients undergoing elective colorectal 29. Carli F, Zavorsky GS (2005) Optimizing functional exercise
    resection for cancer. Ann Surg 245:867–872                   capacity in the elderly surgical population. Curr Opin Clin Nutr
 10. Serclova Z, Dytrych P, Marvan J et al (2009) Fast-track in open Metab Care 8:23–32
    intestinal surgery: prospective randomized study (Clinical Trials 30. Topp R, Swank AM, Quesada PM et al (2009) The effect of
    Gov Identiﬁer no. NCT00123456). Clin Nutr 28:618–624         prehabilitation exercise on strength and functioning after total
 11. Muller S, Zalunardo MP, Hubner M et al (2009) A fast-track  knee arthroplasty. PM R 1:729–735
    program reduces complications and length of hospital stay after 31. Valkenet K, Port I, Dronkers J et al (2011) The effects of pre-
    open colonic surgery. Gastroenterology 136:842–847           operative exercise therapy on postoperative outcome: a sys-
 12. Verhagen AP, de Vet HC, de Bie RA et al (1998) The Delphi   tematic review. Clin Rehabil 25:99–111
    list: a criteria list for quality assessment of randomized clinical 32. Lemanu DP, Singh PP, MacCormick AD et al (2013) Effect of
    trials for conducting systematic reviews developed by Delphi preoperative exercise on cardiorespiratory function and recovery
    consensus. J Clin Epidemiol 51:1235–1241                     after surgery: a systematic review. World J Surg 37:711–720.
 13. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE et al (2008) GRADE: an         doi:10.1007/s00268-012-1886-4
    emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength 33. Carver TE, Mayo N, Andersen RE et al (2011) Pilot investiga-
    of recommendations. BMJ 336:924–926                          tion to evaluate changes in exercise capacity following a pre-
 14. Kiecolt-Glaser J, Page G, Marucha P et al (1998) Psychological habilitation intervention among seriously obese patients
    inﬂuences on surgical recovery. Perspectives from psychoneu- awaiting bariatric surgery. Can J Diabet 35:149
    roimmunology. Am Psychol 53:1209–1218                     34. Carli F, Charlebois P, Stein B et al (2010) Randomized clinical
 15. Hathaway D (1986) Effect of preoperative instruction on post- trial of prehabilitation in colorectal surgery. Br J Surg
    operative outcomes: a meta-analysis. Nurs Res 35:269–275     97:1187–1197
 16. Devine EC, Cook TD (1983) A meta-analytic analysis of effects 35. Fried M, Hainer V, Basdevant A et al (2007) Interdisciplinary
    of psychoeducational interventions on length of postsurgical European guidelines for surgery for severe (morbid) obesity.
    hospital stay. Nurs Res 32:267–274                           Obes Surg 17:260–270
 17. Egbert LD, Battit GE, Welch CE et al (1964) Reduction of 36. Mills E, Eyawo O, Lockhart I et al (2011) Smoking cessation
    postoperative pain by encouragement and instruction of patients. reduces postoperative complications: a systematic review and
    A study of doctor-patient rapport. N Engl J Med 270:825–827  meta-analysis. Am J Med 124(144–154):e8
 18. Disbrow EA, Bennett HL, Owings JT (1993) Effect of preop- 37. Sorensen LT, Karlsmark T, Gottrup F (2003) Abstinence from
    erative suggestion on postoperative gastrointestinal motility. smoking reduces incisional wound infection: a randomized
    West J Med 158:488–492                                       controlled trial. Ann Surg 238:1–5
 19. Halaszynski TM, Juda R, Silverman DG (2004) Optimizing   38. Gourgiotis S, Aloizos S, Gakis C et al (2011) Platypnea-orth-
    postoperative outcomes with efﬁcient preoperative assessment odeoxia due to fat embolism. Int J Surg Case Rep 2:147–149
    and management. Crit Care Med 32:S76–S86                  39. Moller AM, Villebro N, Pedersen T et al (2002) Effect of pre-
 20. Forster AJ, Clark HD, Menard A et al (2005) Effect of a nurse operative smoking intervention on postoperative complications:
    team  coordinator on outcomes for hospitalized medicine      a randomised clinical trial. Lancet 359:114–117
    patients. Am J Med 118:1148–1153                          40. Levin L, Herzberg R, Dolev E et al (2004) Smoking and com-
 21. Kahokehr A, Broadbent E, Wheeler BR et al (2012) The effect plications of onlay bone grafts and sinus lift operations. Int J
    of perioperative psychological intervention on fatigue after Oral Maxillofac Implants 19:369–373
    laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a randomized controlled trial. 41. Myles PS, Leslie K, Angliss M et al (2004) Effectiveness of
    Surg Endosc 26:1730–1736                                     bupropion as an aid to stopping smoking before elective surgery:
 22. Broadbent E, Kahokehr A, Booth RJ et al (2012) A brief      a randomised controlled trial. Anaesthesia 59:1053–1058
    relaxation intervention reduces stress and improves surgical 42. Warner DO, Patten CA, Ames SC et al (2005) Effect of nicotine
    wound healing response: a randomised trial. Brain Behav      replacement therapy on stress and smoking behavior in surgical
    Immun 26:212–217                                             patients. Anesthesiology 102:1138–1146
 23. Johansson K, Salantera S, Heikkinen K et al (2004) Surgical 43. Tonnesen H, Petersen KR, Hojgaard L et al (1992) Postoperative
    patient education: assessing the interventions and exploring the morbidity among symptom-free alcohol misusers. Lancet
    outcomes from experimental and quasi-experimental studies    340:334–337
    from 1990 to 2003. Clin Eff Nurs 8:81–92                  44. Nath B, Li Y, Carroll JE et al (2010) Alcohol exposure as a risk
 24. Ronco M, Iona L, Fabbro C et al (2012) Patient education    factor for adverse outcomes in elective surgery. J Gastrointest
    outcomes in surgery: a systematic review from 2004 to 2010. Int Surg 14:1732–1741
    J Evid Based Healthc 10:309–323                           45. Tonnesen H, Kehlet H (1999) Preoperative alcoholism and
 25. Stacey D, Taljaard M, Dervin G et al (2015) Impact of patient postoperative morbidity. Br J Surg 86:869–874
    decision aids on appropriate and timely access to hip or knee 46. Tonnesen H, Rosenberg J, Nielsen HJ et al (1999) Effect of
    arthroplasty for osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. preoperative abstinence on poor postoperative outcome in alcohol
    Osteoarthr Cartil 24(1):99–107                               misusers: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 318:1311–1316
 26. Committee SG (2008) SAGES guideline for clinical application 47. Ostlund MP, Backman O, Marsk R et al (2013) Increased
    of laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc 22:2281–2300  admission for alcohol dependence after gastric bypass surgery
 27. Mechanick J, Kushner R, Sugerman H et al (2009) American    compared with  restrictive bariatric surgery. JAMA Surg
    Association of Clinical Endcrinoliogists, The Obesity Society, 148:374–377
    and American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery  48. Edholm D, Kullberg J, Haenni A et al (2011) Preoperative
    medical guidelines for clinical practice for the perioperative 4-week low-calorie diet reduces liver volume and intrahepatic
    nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric fat, and facilitates laparoscopic gastric bypass in morbidly
    surgery patient. Obesity 17:S1–S70                           obese. Obes Surg 21:345–350
 28. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W et al (2012) Guidelines 49. Colles SL, Dixon JB, Marks P et al (2006) Preoperative weight
    for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: enhanced loss with a very-low-energy diet: quantitation of changes in liver

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                                 2079

    and  abdominal fat by serial imaging. Am J Clin  Nutr     70. Seimon RV, Brennan IM, Russo A et al (2013) Gastric empty-
    84:304–311                                                   ing, mouth-to-cecum transit, and glycemic, insulin, incretin, and
 50. Van Nieuwenhove Y, Dambrauskas Z, Campillo-Soto A et al     energy intake responses to a mixed-nutrient liquid in lean,
    (2011) Preoperative very low-calorie diet and operative outcome overweight, and obese males. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
    after laparoscopic gastric bypass: a randomized multicenter  304:E294–E300
    study. Arch Surg 146:1300–1305                            71. Maltby JR, Pytka S, Watson NC et al (2004) Drinking 300 mL
 51. Cassie S, Menezes C, Birch DW et al (2011) Effect of preop- of clear ﬂuid two hours before surgery has no effect on gastric
    erative weight loss in bariatric surgical patients: a systematic ﬂuid volume and pH in fasting and non-fasting obese patients.
    review. Surg Obes Relat Dis 7:760–767 discussion 767         Can J Anaesth 51:111–115
 52. Anderin C, Gustafsson UO, Heijbel N et al (2015) Weight loss 72. Maltby JR (2006) Fasting from midnight—the history behind
    before bariatric surgery and postoperative complications: data the dogma. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 20:363–378
    from the Scandinavian Obesity Registry (SOReg). Ann Surg  73. Ishihara H, Singh H, Giesecke AH (1994) Relationship between
    261:909–913                                                  diabetic autonomic neuropathy and gastric contents. Anesth
 53. Livhits M, Mercado C, Yermilov I et al (2009) Does weight loss Analg 78:943–947
    immediately before bariatric surgery improve outcomes: a sys- 74. Bertin E, Schneider N, Abdelli N et al (2001) Gastric emptying
    tematic review. Surg Obes Relat Dis 5:713–721                is accelerated in obese type 2 diabetic patients without auto-
 54. Gerber P, Anderin C, Gustafsson UO et al (2015) Weight loss nomic neuropathy. Diabetes Metab 27:357–364
    immediately prior to gastric bypass and postoperative weight 75. The American Society of Anesthesiologist Task Force on Pre-
    change. Surg Obes Relat Dis. doi:10.1016/j.soard.2015.08.519 operative Fasting (1999) Practice guidelines for preoperative
 55. Thorell A, Hagstrom-Toft E (2012) Treatment of diabetes prior to fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of
    and after bariatric surgery. J Diabetes Sci Technol 6:1226–1232 pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing
 56. Barnes PJ (1998) Anti-inﬂammatory actions of glucocorticoids: elective procedures: a report by the American Society of
    molecular mechanisms. Clin Sci (Lond) 94:557–572             Anesthesiologist Task Force on Preoperative Fasting. Anesthe-
 57. Sapolsky RM, Romero LM, Munck AU (2000) How do gluco-       siology 90:896–905
    corticoids inﬂuence stress responses? Integrating permissive, 76. Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I et al (2011) Perioperative fasting in
    suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative actions. Endocr Rev adults and children: guidelines from the European Society of
    21:55–89                                                     Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 28:556–569
 58. Henzi I, Walder B, Tramer MR (2000) Dexamethasone for the 77. Ljungqvist O (2012) Jonathan E. Rhoads lecture 2011: insulin
    prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting: a quantitative resistance and enhanced recovery after surgery. JPEN J Parenter
    systematic review. Anesth Analg 90:186–194                   Enteral Nutr 36:389–398
 59. Srinivasa S, Kahokehr AA, Yu TC et al (2011) Preoperative 78. Awad S, Varadhan KK, Ljungqvist O et al (2013) A meta-
    glucocorticoid use in major abdominal surgery: systematic    analysis of randomised controlled trials on preoperative oral
    review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Ann Surg      carbohydrate treatment in elective surgery. Clin Nutr 32:34–44
    254:183–191                                               79. Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L et al (2014) Preoperative carbo-
 60. Liu K, Hsu CC, Chia YY (1999) The effective dose of dex-    hydrate treatment for enhancing recovery after elective surgery.
    amethasone for antiemesis after major gynecological surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:Cd009161
    Anesth Analg 89:1316–1318                                 80. Gustafsson UO, Nygren J, Thorell A et al (2008) Pre-operative
 61. Wang JJ, Ho ST, Lee SC et al (2000) The use of dexamethasone carbohydrate loading may be used in type 2 diabetes patients.
    for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting in females  Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 52:946–951
    undergoing thyroidectomy: a dose-ranging study. Anesth Analg 81. Azagury DE, Ris F, Pichard C et al (2015) Does perioperative
    91:1404–1407                                                 nutrition and oral carbohydrate load sustainably preserve muscle
 62. Wang JJ, Ho ST, Wong CS et al (2001) Dexamethasone pro-     mass after bariatric surgery? A randomized control trial. Surg
    phylaxis of nausea and vomiting after epidural morphine for  Obes Relat Dis 11:920–926
    post-Cesarean analgesia. Can J Anaesth 48:185–190         82. Lemanu DP, Singh PP, Berridge K et al (2013) Randomized
 63. McCarty TM, Arnold DT, Lamont JP et al (2005) Optimizing    clinical trial of enhanced recovery versus standard care after
    outcomes in bariatric surgery: outpatient laparoscopic gastric laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Br J Surg 100:482–489
    bypass. Ann Surg 242:494–498 discussion 498–501           83. Ronellenﬁtsch U, Schwarzbach M, Kring A et al (2012) The
 64. Sauerland S, Nagelschmidt M, Mallmann P et al (2000) Risks  effect of clinical pathways for bariatric surgery on perioperative
    and beneﬁts of preoperative high dose methylprednisolone in  quality of care. Obes Surg 22:732–739
    surgical patients: a systematic review. Drug Saf 23:449–461 84. Chakravartty S, Sarma DR, Patel AG (2013) Rhabdomyolysis
 65. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F et al (2001) Intensive in bariatric surgery: a systematic review. Obes Surg
    insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med     23:1333–1340
    345:1359–1367                                             85. Poso T, Kesek D, Aroch R et al (2013) Morbid obesity and opti-
 66. Harter RL, Kelly WB, Kramer MG et al (1998) A comparison of mization of preoperative ﬂuid therapy. Obes Surg 23:1799–1805
    the volume and pH of gastric contents of obese and lean surgical 86. Adams JP, Murphy PG (2000) Obesity in anaesthesia and
    patients. Anesth Analg 86:147–152                            intensive care. Br J Anaesth 85:91–108
 67. Juvin P, Fevre G, Merouche M et al (2001) Gastric residue is not 87. Sharma SK, McCauley J, Cottam D et al (2006) Acute changes
    more copious in obese patients. Anesth Analg 93:1621–1622    in renal function after laparoscopic gastric surgery for morbid
    table of contents                                            obesity. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2:389–392
 68. Cardoso-Junior A, Coelho LG, Savassi-Rocha PR et al (2007) 88. Bundgaard-Nielsen M, Secher NH, Kehlet H (2009) ‘Liberal’
    Gastric emptying of solids and semi-solids in morbidly obese vs. ‘restrictive’ perioperative ﬂuid therapy–a critical assessment
    and non-obese subjects: an assessment using the 13C-octanoic of the evidence. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 53:843–851
    acid and 13C-acetic acid breath tests. Obes Surg 17:236–241 89. Varadhan KK, Lobo DN (2010) A meta-analysis of randomised
 69. Buchholz V, Berkenstadt H, Goitein D et al (2013) Gastric   controlled trials of intravenous ﬂuid therapy in major elective
    emptying is not prolonged in obese patients. Surg Obes Relat open abdominal surgery: getting the balance right. Proc Nutr
    Dis 9:714–717                                                Soc 69:488–498

                                                                                                            123


2080                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

 90. de Menezes Ettinger JE, dos Santos Filho PV, Azaro E et al 109. Cattano D, Killoran PV, Iannucci D et al (2013) Anticipation of
    (2005) Prevention of rhabdomyolysis in bariatric surgery. Obes the difﬁcult airway: preoperative airway assessment, an educa-
    Surg 15:874–9                                                tional and quality improvement tool. Br J Anaesth 111:276–285
 91. Domi R, Laho H (2012) Anesthetic challenges in the obese 110. Leoni A, Arlati S, Ghisi D et al (2014) Difﬁcult mask ventilation
    patient. J Anesth 26:758–765                                 in obese patients: analysis of predictive factors. Minerva
 92. Schuster R, Alami RS, Curet MJ et al (2006) Intra-operative Anestesiol 80:149–157
    ﬂuid volume inﬂuences postoperative nausea and vomiting after 111. Nicholson A, Cook TM, Smith AF et al (2013) Supraglottic
    laparoscopic gastric bypass surgery. Obes Surg 16:848–851    airway devices versus tracheal intubation for airway manage-
 93. Ogunnaike BO, Jones SB, Jones DB et al (2002) Anesthetic    ment during general anaesthesia in obese patients. Cochrane
    considerations for bariatric surgery. Anesth Analg 95:1793–1805 Database Syst Rev 9:CD010105. doi:10.1002/14651858.
 94. Nossaman VE, Richardson WS 3rd, Wooldridge JB Jr et al      CD010105.pub2
    (2015) Role of intraoperative ﬂuids on hospital length of stay in 112. Nicholson A, Smith AF, Lewis SR et al (2014) Tracheal intu-
    laparoscopic bariatric surgery: a retrospective study in 224 bation with a ﬂexible intubation scope versus other intubation
    consecutive patients. Surg Endosc 29:2960–2969               techniques for obese patients requiring general anaesthesia.
 95. Wool DB, Lemmens HJ, Brodsky JB et al (2010) Intraoperative Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:Cd010320
    ﬂuid replacement and postoperative creatine phosphokinase 113. Collins JS, Lemmens HJ, Brodsky JB et al (2004) Laryngoscopy
    levels in laparoscopic bariatric patients. Obes Surg 20:698–701 and morbid obesity: a comparison of the ‘‘sniff’’ and ‘‘ramped’’
 96. MatotI, Paskaleva R, Eid L etal(2012) Effect of the volume of ﬂuids positions. Obes Surg 14:1171–1175
    administered on intraoperative oliguria in laparoscopic bariatric 114. Erlandsson K, Odenstedt H, Lundin S et al (2006) Positive end-
    surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Surg 147:228–234 expiratory pressure optimization using electric impedance
 97. Jain AK, Dutta A (2010) Stroke volume variation as a guide to tomography in morbidly obese patients during laparoscopic
    ﬂuid administration in morbidly obese patients undergoing    gastric bypass surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 50:833–839
    laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Obes Surg 20:709–715     115. Reinius H, Jonsson L, Gustafsson S et al (2009) Prevention of
 98. Awad S, Carter S, Purkayastha S et al (2014) Enhanced recovery atelectasis in morbidly obese patients during general anesthesia
    after bariatric surgery (ERABS): clinical outcomes from a ter- and paralysis: a computerized tomography study. Anesthesiol-
    tiary referral bariatric centre. Obes Surg 24(5):753–758     ogy 111:979–987
 99. Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G et al (2015) Enhanced recovery 116. Talab HF, Zabani IA, Abdelrahman HS et al (2009) Intraoper-
    after surgery (ERAS) for gastrointestinal surgery, part 2: con- ative ventilatory strategies for prevention of pulmonary atelec-
    sensus statement for anaesthesia practice. Acta Anaesthesiol tasis in obese patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery.
    Scand 60(3):289–334                                          Anesth Analg 109:1511–1516
100. Apfel CC, Heidrich FM, Jukar-Rao S et al (2012) Evidence- 117. Whalen FX, Gajic O, Thompson GB et al (2006) The effects of
    based analysis of risk factors for postoperative nausea and  the alveolar recruitment maneuver and positive end-expiratory
    vomiting. Br J Anaesth 109:742–753                           pressure on arterial oxygenation during laparoscopic bariatric
101. Gan TJ, Diemunsch P, Habib AS et al (2014) Consensus        surgery. Anesth Analg 102:298–305
    guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and 118. Bohm SH, Thamm OC, von Sandersleben A et al (2009) Alveolar
    vomiting. Anesth Analg 118:85–113                            recruitment strategy and high positive end-expiratory pressure
102. Ziemann-Gimmel P, Goldfarb AA, Koppman J et al (2014)       levels do not affect hemodynamics in morbidly obese intravas-
    Opioid-free total intravenous anaesthesia reduces postoperative cular volume-loaded patients. Anesth Analg 109:160–163
    nausea and vomiting in bariatric surgery beyond triple prophy- 119. Aldenkortt M, Lysakowski C, Elia N et al (2012) Ventilation
    laxis. Br J Anaesth 112:906–911                              strategies in obese patients undergoing surgery: a quantitative
103. Benevides ML, Oliveira SS, de Aguilar-Nascimento JE (2013)  systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 109:493–502
    The combination of haloperidol, dexamethasone, and ondanse- 120. Futier E, Constantin JM, Paugam-Burtz C et al (2013) A trial of
    tron for prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting in  intraoperative low-tidal-volume ventilation in abdominal sur-
    laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a randomized double-blind   gery. N Engl J Med 369:428–437
    trial. Obes Surg 23:1389–1396                            121. Dixon BJ, Dixon JB, Carden JR, et al. (2005) Preoxygenation is
104. Strum EM, Szenohradszki J, Kaufman WA, et al. (2004)        more effective in the 25 degrees head-up position than in the
    Emergence and recovery characteristics of desﬂurane versus   supine position in severely obese patients: a randomized con-
    sevoﬂurane in morbidly obese adult surgical patients: a      trolled study. Anesthesiology 102:1110–1115. discussion 5A
    prospective, randomized study. Anesth Analg 99:1848–1853. 122. Valenza F, Vagginelli F, Tiby A et al (2007) Effects of the beach
    table of contents                                            chair position, positive end-expiratory pressure, and pneu-
105. Juvin P, Vadam C, Malek L et al (2000) Postoperative recovery moperitoneum on respiratory function in morbidly obese
    after desﬂurane, propofol, or isoﬂurane anesthesia among mor- patients during anesthesia and paralysis. Anesthesiology
    bidly obese patients: a prospective, randomized study. Anesth 107:725–732
    Analg 91:714–719                                         123. Mulier JP, Dillemans B, Van Cauwenberge S (2010) Impact of
106. Bilotta F, Doronzio A, Cuzzone V et al (2009) Early postoper- the patient’s body position on the intraabdominal workspace
    ative cognitive recovery and gas exchange patterns after bal- during laparoscopic surgery. Surg Endosc 24:1398–1402
    anced anesthesia with sevoﬂurane or desﬂurane in overweight 124. Staehr-Rye AK, Rasmussen LS, Rosenberg J et al (2014) Sur-
    and obese patients undergoing craniotomy: a prospective ran- gical space conditions during low-pressure laparoscopic chole-
    domized trial. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 21:207–213            cystectomy with deep versus moderate neuromuscular blockade:
107. Kaur A, Jain AK, Sehgal R et al (2013) Hemodynamics and     a randomized clinical study. Anesth Analg 119:1084–1092
    early recovery characteristics of desﬂurane versus sevoﬂurane in 125. Martini CH, Boon M, Bevers RF et al (2014) Evaluation of
    bariatric surgery. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 29:36–40    surgical conditions during laparoscopic surgery in patients with
108. Apfel CC, Kranke P, Katz MH et al (2002) Volatile anaesthetics moderate vs deep neuromuscular block. Br J Anaesth
    may be the main cause of early but not delayed postoperative 112:498–505
    vomiting: a randomized controlled trial of factorial design. Br J 126. Carron M, Gasparetto M, Vindigni V et al (2014) Laparoscopic
    Anaesth 88:659–668                                           surgery in a morbidly obese, high-risk cardiac patient: the

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                                 2081

    beneﬁts of deep neuromuscular block and sugammadex. Br J 145. Higa KD, Ho T, Boone KB   (2003) Internal hernias after
    Anaesth 113:186–187                                          laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: incidence, treatment
127. Batistaki C, Tentes P, Deligiannidi P et al (2015) Residual and prevention. Obes Surg 13:350–354
    neuromuscular blockade in a real life clinical setting. Correla- 146. Capella RF, Iannace VA, Capella JF (2006) Bowel obstruction
    tion with sugammadex or neostigmine administration. Minerva  after open and laparoscopic gastric bypass surgery for morbid
    Anestesiol [Epub ahead of print]                             obesity. J Am Coll Surg 203:328–335
128. Fortier LP, McKeen D, Turner K et al (2015) The RECITE  147. Sussenbach SP, Silva EN, Pufal MA et al (2014) Systematic
    Study: a Canadian Prospective. Multicenter Study of the Inci- review of economic evaluation of laparotomy versus laparo-
    dence and  Severity of Residual Neuromuscular Blockade.      scopy for patients submitted to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. PLoS
    Anesth Analg 121:366–372                                     ONE 9:e99976
129. Schreiber JU (2014) Management of neuromuscular blockade in 148. Bailey JG, Hayden JA, Davis PJ et al (2014) Robotic versus
    ambulatory patients. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 27:583–588       laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) in obese adults
130. Ozturk Arikan FG, Turan G, Ozgultekin A et al (2015)        ages 18 to 65 years: a systematic review and economic analysis.
    Rocuronium: automatic infusion versus manual administration  Surg Endosc 28:414–426
    with TOF monitorisation. J Clin Monit Comput. doi:10.1007/ 149. Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B (2005) Prophylactic nasogastric
    s10877-015-9751-2                                            decompression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database
131. Murphy GS, Brull SJ (2010) Residual neuromuscular block:    Syst Rev:Cd004929
    lessons unlearned. Part I: deﬁnitions, incidence, and adverse 150. Huerta S, Arteaga JR, Sawicki MP et al (2002) Assessment of
    physiologic effects of residual neuromuscular block. Anesth  routine elimination of postoperative nasogastric decompression
    Analg 111:120–128                                            after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surgery 132:844–848
132. Sauer M, Stahn A, Soltesz S et al (2011) The inﬂuence of 151. Yang Z, Zheng Q, Wang Z (2008) Meta-analysis of the need for
    residual neuromuscular block on the incidence of critical res- nasogastric or nasojejunal decompression after gastrectomy for
    piratory events. A randomised, prospective, placebo-controlled gastric cancer. Br J Surg 95:809–816
    trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 28:842–848                     152. Liscia G, Scaringi S, Facchiano E et al (2014) The role of
133. Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Marymont JH et al (2008) Intraoper-   drainage after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for morbid obesity: a
    ative acceleromyographic monitoring reduces the risk of resid- systematic review. Surg Obes Relat Dis 10:171–176
    ual neuromuscular blockade and adverse respiratory events in 153. Kavuturu S, Rogers AM, Haluck RS (2012) Routine drain
    the postanesthesia care unit. Anesthesiology 109:389–398     placement in Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: an expanded retro-
134. Butterly A, Bittner EA, George E et al (2010) Postoperative spective comparative study of 755 patients and review of the
    residual curarization from intermediate-acting neuromuscular literature. Obes Surg 22:177–181
    blocking agents delays recovery room discharge. Br J Anaesth 154. Kim J, Lee J, Hyung WJ et al (2004) Gastric cancer surgery
    105:304–309                                                  without drains: a prospective randomized trial. J Gastrointest
135. Murphy GS, Szokol JW, Avram MJ et al (2011) Intraoperative  Surg 8:727–732
    acceleromyography monitoring reduces symptoms of muscle  155. Petrowsky H, Demartines N, Rousson V, et al. (2004) Evidence-
    weakness and improves quality of recovery in the early post- based value of prophylactic drainage in gastrointestinal surgery:
    operative period. Anesthesiology 115:946–954                 a  systematic review  and   meta-analyses. Ann  Surg
136. Abrishami A, Ho J, Wong J, et al. (2009) Sugammadex, a      240:1074–1084. discussion 1084–5
    selective reversal medication for preventing postoperative 156. Siyam M, Benhamou D (2007) Anaesthetic management of
    residual neuromuscular blockade. Cochrane Database Syst      adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Ann Fr
    Rev:Cd007362                                                 Anesth Reanim 26:39–52
137. Suzuki T, Masaki G, Ogawa S (2006) Neostigmine-induced  157. Ziemann-Gimmel P, Hensel P, Koppman J et al (2013) Multi-
    reversal of vecuronium in normal weight, overweight and obese modal analgesia reduces narcotic requirements and antiemetic
    female patients. Br J Anaesth 97:160–163                     rescue medication in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
138. Baillard C, Clec’h C, Catineau J et al (2005) Postoperative surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis 9:975–980
    residual neuromuscular block: a survey of management. Br J 158. Maund E, McDaid C, Rice S et al (2011) Paracetamol and
    Anaesth 95:622–626                                           selective and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
139. Jones RK, Caldwell JE, Brull SJ et al (2008) Reversal of pro- drugs for the reduction in morphine-related side-effects after
    found rocuronium-induced blockade with sugammadex: a ran-    major  surgery: a  systematic review. Br  J  Anaesth
    domized  comparison  with  neostigmine. Anesthesiology       106:292–297
    109:816–824                                              159. Chaparro LE, Clarke H, Valdes PA et al (2012) Adding prega-
140. Blobner M, Eriksson LI, Scholz J et al (2010) Reversal of rocuro- balin to a multimodal analgesic regimen does not reduce pain
    nium-induced neuromuscular blockade with sugammadex com-     scores following cosmetic surgery: a randomized trial. J Anesth
    pared with neostigmine during sevoﬂurane anaesthesia: results of a 26:829–835
    randomised, controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 27:874–881 160. Tufanogullari B, White PF, Peixoto MP et al (2008) Dexmedeto-
141. Nguyen NT, Nguyen B, Shih A et al (2013) Use of laparoscopy midine infusion during laparoscopic bariatric surgery: the effect on
    in general surgical operations at academic centers. Surg Obes recovery outcome variables. Anesth Analg 106:1741–1748
    Relat Dis 9:15–20                                        161. Graves DA, Batenhorst RL, Bennett RL et al (1983) Morphine
142. Lujan JA, Frutos MD, Hernandez Q et al (2004) Laparoscopic  requirements using patient-controlled analgesia: inﬂuence of
    versus open gastric bypass in the treatment of morbid obesity: a diurnal variation and morbid obesity. Clin Pharm 2:49–53
    randomized prospective study. Ann Surg 239:433–437       162. Frey WC, Pilcher J (2003) Obstructive sleep-related breathing
143. Nguyen NT, Goldman C, Rosenquist CJ et al (2001) Laparoscopic disorders in patients evaluated for bariatric surgery. Obes Surg
    versus open gastric bypass: a randomized study of outcomes, quality 13:676–683
    of life, and costs. Ann Surg 234:279–289. discussion 289–91 163. Beaussier M, Bouaziz H, Aubrun F et al (2012) Wound inﬁl-
144. Westling A, Gustavsson S (2001) Laparoscopic vs open Roux-  tration with local anesthetics for postoperative analgesia. Results
    en-Y gastric bypass: a prospective, randomized trial. Obes Surg of a national survey about its practice in France. Ann Fr Anesth
    11:284–292                                                   Reanim 31:120–125

                                                                                                            123


2082                                                                                    World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083

164. Kahokehr A, Sammour T, Soop M et al (2010) Intraperitoneal 182. Rowan BO, Kuhl DA, Lee MD et al (2008) Anti-Xa levels in
    use of local anesthetic in laparoscopic cholecystectomy: sys- bariatric surgery patients receiving prophylactic enoxaparin.
    tematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Surg 18:162–166
    J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 17:637–656                  183. Simone EP, Madan AK, Tichansky DS et al (2008) Comparison
165. Pappas-Gogos G, Tsimogiannis KE, Zikos N et al (2008)       of two low-molecular-weight heparin dosing regimens for
    Preincisional and intraperitoneal ropivacaine plus normal saline patients undergoing laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc
    infusion for postoperative pain relief after laparoscopic chole- 22:2392–2395
    cystectomy: a randomized double-blind controlled trial. Surg 184. Borkgren-Okonek MJ, Hart RW, Pantano JE et al (2008)
    Endosc 22:2036–2045                                          Enoxaparin thromboprophylaxis in gastric bypass patients:
166. Alkhamesi NA, Kane JM, Guske PJ et al (2008) Intraperitoneal extended duration, dose stratiﬁcation, and antifactor Xa activity.
    aerosolization of bupivacaine is a safe and effective method in Surg Obes Relat Dis 4:625–631
    controlling postoperative pain in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gas- 185. Bergqvist D, Agnelli G, Cohen AT et al (2002) Duration of
    tric bypass. J Pain Res 1:9–13                               prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism with enoxaparin
167. Hilvering B, Draaisma WA, van der Bilt JD et al (2011) Ran- after surgery for cancer. N Engl J Med 346:975–980
    domized clinical trial of combined preincisional inﬁltration and 186. Hull RD, Pineo GF, Stein PD et al (2001) Extended out-of-
    intraperitoneal instillation of levobupivacaine for postoperative hospital low-molecular-weight heparin prophylaxis against deep
    pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Surg 98:784–789 venous thrombosis in patients after elective hip arthroplasty: a
168. Wassef M, Lee DY, Levine JL et al (2013) Feasibility and    systematic review. Ann Intern Med 135:858–869
    analgesic efﬁcacy of the transversus abdominis plane block after 187. Lorch H, Zwaan M, Siemens HJ et al (2000) Temporary vena
    single-port laparoscopy in patients having bariatric surgery. cava ﬁlters and ultrahigh streptokinase thrombolysis therapy: a
    J Pain Res 6:837–841                                         clinical study. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 23:273–278
169. von Ungern-Sternberg BS, Regli A, Reber A et al (2005) Effect 188. Kaufman JA, Kinney TB, Streiff MB et al (2006) Guidelines for
    of obesity and thoracic epidural analgesia on perioperative  the use of retrievable and convertible vena cava ﬁlters: report
    spirometry. Br J Anaesth 94:121–127                          from the Society of Interventional Radiology multidisciplinary
170. Levy BF, Scott MJ, Fawcett W et al (2011) Randomized clinical consensus conference. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2:200–212
    trial of epidural, spinal or patient-controlled analgesia for 189. Offner PJ, Hawkes A, Madayag R et al (2003) The role of
    patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Br J Surg temporary inferior vena cava ﬁlters in critically ill surgical
    98:1068–1078                                                 patients. Arch Surg 138:591–594. discussion 594–5
171. Charghi R, Backman S, Christou N et al (2003) Patient con- 190. Mechanick JI, Kushner RF, Sugerman HJ et al (2008) American
    trolled i.v. analgesia is an acceptable pain management strategy Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. The Obesity Society,
    in morbidly obese patients undergoing gastric bypass surgery. A and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery
    retrospective comparison with epidural analgesia. Can J Anaesth Medical guidelines for clinical practice for the perioperative
    50:672–678                                                   nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric
172. Mismetti P, Laporte S, Darmon JY et al (2001) Meta-analysis of surgery patient. Endocr Pract 14(Suppl 1):1–83
    low molecular weight heparin in the prevention of venous 191. Crowley LV, Seay J, Mullin G (1984) Late effects of gastric
    thromboembolism in general surgery. Br J Surg 88:913–930     bypass for obesity. Am J Gastroenterol 79:850–860
173. Clagett GP, Reisch JS (1988) Prevention of venous throm- 192. Kushner R (2000) Managing the obese patient after bariatric
    boembolism in general surgical patients. Results of meta-anal- surgery: a case report of severe malnutrition and review of the
    ysis. Ann Surg 208:227–240                                   literature. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 24:126–132
174. Overby DW, Kohn GP, Cahan MA et al (2009) Prevalence of 193. Stocker DJ (2003) Management of the bariatric surgery patient.
    thrombophilias in patients presenting for bariatric surgery. Obes Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 32:437–457
    Surg 19:1278–1285                                        194. Brolin RE (2001) Gastric bypass. Surg Clin North Am
175. Samama MM (2000) An epidemiologic study of risk factors for 81:1077–1095
    deep vein thrombosis in medical outpatients: the Sirius study. 195. Heber D, Greenway FL, Kaplan LM et al (2010) Endocrine and
    Arch Intern Med 160:3415–3420                                nutritional management of the post-bariatric surgery patient: an
176. Geerts WH, Pineo GF, Heit JA et al (2004) Prevention of venous Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocri-
    thromboembolism:  the Seventh  ACCP    Conference on         nol Metab 95:4823–4843
    Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic Therapy. Chest 126:338s–400s 196. Donadelli SP, Junqueira-Franco MV, de Mattos Donadelli CA
177. Gonzalez QH, Tishler DS, Plata-Munoz JJ et al (2004) Incidence et al (2012) Daily vitamin supplementation and hypovitaminosis
    of clinically evident deep venous thrombosis after laparoscopic after obesity surgery. Nutrition 28:391–396
    Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Endosc 18:1082–1084       197. Khanna V, Kashyap SR (2015) Clinical management of type 2
178. Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M et al (2012) Executive sum-   diabetes mellitus after bariatric surgery. Curr Atheroscler Rep
    mary: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th 17:59
    ed: American college of chest physicians evidence-based clini- 198. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
    cal practice guidelines. Chest 141:7S–47S                    Blood Cholesterol in Adults (2001) Executive summary of the
179. Shepherd MF, Rosborough TK, Schwartz ML (2003) Heparin      third report of the national cholesterol education program
    thromboprophylaxis in gastric bypass surgery. Obes Surg      (NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of
    13:249–253                                                   high blood cholesterol in adults (adult treatment panel III).
180. Hirsh J, Raschke R (2004) Heparin and low-molecular-weight  JAMA 285:2486–2497
    heparin: the Seventh ACCP Conference on Antithrombotic and 199. The Evidence Report. National Institutes of Health (1998) Clinical
    Thrombolytic Therapy. Chest 126:188s–203s                    guidelines on the identiﬁcation, evaluation, and treatment of
181. American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Clinical overweight and obesity in adults—the evidence report. National
    Issues Committee (2013) ASMBS updated position statement on  Institutes of Health. Obes Res 6(Suppl 2):51s–209s
    prophylactic measures to reduce the risk of venous throm- 200. Dhatariya K, Levy N, Kilvert A et al (2012) NHS Diabetes
    boembolism in bariatric surgery patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis guideline for the perioperative management of the adult patient
    9:493–497                                                    with diabetes. Diabet Med 29:420–433

123


World J Surg (2016) 40:2065–2083                                                                                 2083

201. Robinson PD (2014) Obesity and its impact on the respiratory 217. Mutter TC, Chateau D, Moffatt M et al (2014) A matched cohort
    system. Paediatr Respir Rev 15:219–226                       study of postoperative outcomes in obstructive sleep apnea:
202. Eichenberger A, Proietti S, Wicky S et al (2002) Morbid obesity could preoperative diagnosis and treatment prevent complica-
    and postoperative pulmonary atelectasis: an underestimated   tions? Anesthesiology 121:707–718
    problem. Anesth Analg 95:1788–1792. table of contents    218. Zarbock A, Mueller E, Netzer S et al (2009) Prophylactic nasal
203. Guimaraes MM, El Dib R, Smith AF et al (2009) Incentive     continuous positive airway pressure following cardiac surgery
    spirometry for prevention of postoperative pulmonary compli- protects from postoperative pulmonary complications: a
    cations in upper abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst   prospective, randomized, controlled trial in 500 patients. Chest
    Rev:Cd006058                                                 135:1252–1259
204. von Ungern-Sternberg BS, Regli A, Schneider MC et al (2004) 219. Komatsu R, Turan AM, Orhan-Sungur M et al (2007)
    Effect of obesity and site of surgery on perioperative lung vol- Remifentanil for general anaesthesia: a systematic review.
    umes. Br J Anaesth 92:202–207                                Anaesthesia 62:1266–1280
205. Fleischmann E, Kurz A, Niedermayr M et al (2005) Tissue 220. Olbers T, Fagevik-Olsen M, Maleckas A et al (2005) Ran-
    oxygenation in obese and non-obese patients during laparo-   domized clinical trial of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
    scopy. Obes Surg 15:813–819                                  versus laparoscopic vertical banded gastroplasty for obesity. Br
206. Chung F, Subramanyam R, Liao P et al (2012) High STOP-Bang  J Surg 92:557–562
    score indicates a high probability of obstructive sleep apnoea. Br 221. Jensen C, Tejirian T, Lewis C et al (2008) Postoperative CPAP
    J Anaesth 108:768–775                                        and BiPAP use can be safely omitted after laparoscopic Roux-
207. Ahmad S, Nagle A, McCarthy RJ et al (2008) Postoperative    en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis 4:512–514
    hypoxemia  in morbidly obese patients with and without   222. Lindberg E, Berne C, Elmasry A et al (2006) CPAP treatment of
    obstructive sleep apnea undergoing laparoscopic bariatric sur- a population-based sample—what are the beneﬁts and the
    gery. Anesth Analg 107:138–143                               treatment compliance? Sleep Med 7:553–560
208. Mehta V, Vasu TS, Phillips B et al (2013) Obstructive sleep 223. Liao P, Yegneswaran B, Vairavanathan S et al (2009) Postop-
    apnea and oxygen therapy: a systematic review of the literature erative complications in patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a
    and meta-analysis. J Clin Sleep Med 9:271–279                retrospective matched cohort study. Can J Anaesth 56:819–828
209. Meoli AL, Rosen CL, Kristo D et al (2003) Upper airway  224. Bolden N, Smith CE, Auckley D et al (2007) Perioperative
    management of the adult patient with obstructive sleep apnea in complications during use of an obstructive sleep apnea protocol
    the  perioperative period–avoiding complications. Sleep      following surgery and anesthesia. Anesth Analg 105:1869–1870
    26:1060–1065                                             225. DeMaria EJ, Portenier D, Wolfe L (2007) Obesity surgery
210. Wong DT, Adly E, Ip HY et al (2011) A comparison between    mortality risk score: proposal for a clinically useful score to
    the Boussignac continuous positive airway pressure mask and  predict mortality risk in patients undergoing gastric bypass. Surg
    the venturi mask in terms of improvement in the PaO2/F(I)O2  Obes Relat Dis 3:134–140
    ratio in morbidly obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery: a 226. Macintyre PE, Loadsman JA, Scott DA (2011) Opioids, venti-
    randomized controlled trial. Can J Anaesth 58:532–539        lation and acute pain management. Anaesth Intensive Care
211. Giles TL, Lasserson TJ, Smith BJ et al (2006) Continuous    39:545–558
    positive airways pressure for obstructive sleep apnoea in adults. 227. Rennotte MT, Baele P, Aubert G et al (1995) Nasal continuous
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev:Cd001106                          positive airway pressure in the perioperative management of
212. Goudra BG, Singh PM, Penugonda LC et al (2014) Signiﬁcantly patients with obstructive sleep apnea submitted to surgery. Chest
    reduced hypoxemic events in morbidly obese patients under-   107:367–374
    going gastrointestinal endoscopy: predictors and practice effect. 228. Roulin D, Donadini A, Gander S et al (2013) Cost-effectiveness
    J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol 30:71–77                       of the implementation of an enhanced recovery protocol for
213. Neligan PJ, Malhotra G, Fraser M et al (2009) Continuous    colorectal surgery. Br J Surg 100:1108–1114
    positive airway pressure via the Boussignac system immediately 229. Joliat GR, Labgaa I, Petermann D et al (2015) Cost-beneﬁt
    after extubation improves lung function in morbidly obese    analysis of an enhanced recovery protocol for pancreaticoduo-
    patients with obstructive sleep apnea undergoing laparoscopic denectomy. Br J Surg 102:1676–1683
    bariatric surgery. Anesthesiology 110:878–884            230. King PM, Blazeby JM, Ewings P et al (2006) The inﬂuence of
214. Helling TS, Willoughby TL, Maxﬁeld DM et al (2004) Deter-   an enhanced recovery programme on clinical outcomes, costs
    minants of the need for intensive care and prolonged mechanical and quality of life after surgery for colorectal cancer. Colorectal
    ventilation in patients undergoing bariatric surgery. Obes Surg Dis 8:506–513
    14:1036–1041                                             231. Vlug MS, Wind J, Hollmann MW et al (2011) Laparoscopy in
215. Grover BT, Priem DM, Mathiason MA et al (2010) Intensive    combination with fast track multimodal management is the best
    care unit stay not required for patients with obstructive sleep perioperative strategy in patients undergoing colonic surgery: a
    apnea after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes randomized clinical trial (LAFA-study). Ann Surg 254:868–875
    Relat Dis 6:165–170
216. Singh M, Liao P, Kobah S et al (2013) Proportion of surgical
    patients with undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnoea. Br J
    Anaesth 110:629–636


                                                                                                            123



