Guidelines for vulvar and vaginal surgery:Enhanced Recovery After Surgery SocietyrecommendationsAlon D. Altman, HBSc, MD; Magali Robert, MD, MSc; Robert Armbrust, MD;William J. Fawcett, MBBS, FRCA, FFPMRCA; Mikio Nihira, MD, MPH;Chris N. Jones, MBBS, FRCA; Karl Tamussino, MD; Jalid Sehouli, MD; Sean C. Dowdy, MD1;Gregg Nelson, MD, PhD1IntroductionEnhanced Recovery After Surgery(ERAS) is regarded as a global surgicalquality improvement initiative that results in clinical1 and cost benefits.2 TheERAS gynecologic oncology guidelines3,4were first published in 2016 and updatedin 2019.5 The ERAS gynecology protocols to date, however, have focusedmainly on intraabdominal surgery, withno recommendations for vulvar andvaginal surgeries, often performed in theoncology and urogynecology settings,respectively. To address this gap, theERAS Society Gynecology Chapterconvened to critically review the existingevidence and make recommendationsfor the elements of pre-, intra-, andpostoperative care as it relates to vulvarand vaginal surgeries.MethodsLiterature searchThe guideline was developed according topublished methodology from the ERASSociety.6 The authors convenedin September 2019 to discuss topicsfor inclusion; the topic list was basedon the ERAS gynecologic oncologyguidelines,3e5 which were used as atemplate, and expanded to include topicsunique to vulvar and vaginal surgeries.The topics were then allocated among thegroup according to expertise. TheEmbase and PubMed databases weresearched for medical subject headingsbetween 1975 and 2020, including¡§gynecology,¡¨ ¡§gynecologic oncology,¡¨¡§urogynecology,¡¨ and all pre-, intra-, andpostoperative ERAS items (Table 1).Reference lists of all eligible articles werecross-checked for other relevant studies.Meta-analyses, systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), nonrandomized controlled studies, reviews,and case series were considered for eachindividual topic. In this study, 2 to 3 authors reviewed the evidence base for eachitem. The quality of evidence for eachitem was then reviewed and crosschecked by the senior editorial team(A.D.A., G.N., and S.C.D.). The finalmanuscript was then reviewed by all authors to assess the quality of evidence andrelevant studies for final inclusion; allpapers that were examined for inclusionare listed in the Supplemental Appendix(Supplement #1). The search strategywas focused on relevant papers and supplemented by expert citation searches toidentify further important studies. Thepurpose of the search strategy andFrom the Department of Obstetrics, Gynecologyand Reproductive Sciences, University ofManitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada (DrAltman); Department of Obstetrics andGynecology, Cumming School of Medicine,Calgary, Alberta, Canada (Dr Robert);Department of Gynecology with Center forOncological Surgery, Charit? UniversityMedicine of Berlin, European CompetenceCenter for Ovarian Cancer, Berlin, Germany (DrsArmbrust and Sehouli); Department ofAnaesthesia, Royal Surrey County Hospital,Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom (Drs Fawcettand Jones); Division of Female Pelvic Medicineand Reconstructive Surgery, Department ofObstetrics and Gynecology, University ofCalifornia, Riverside, Riverside, CA (Dr Nihira);Division of Gynecology, Medical University ofGraz, Graz, Austria (Dr Tamussino); Division ofGynecologic Oncology, Mayo Clinic College ofMedicine, Rochester, MN (Dr Dowdy); andDivision of Gynecologic Oncology, Tom BakerCancer Centre, Calgary, Alberta, Canada (DrNelson).1These authors declare shared senior authorship.Received April 27, 2020; revised July 17, 2020;accepted July 22, 2020.A.D.A. is a speaker for Sanofi. M.N. is aconsultant for Pacira Pharmaceuticals and aStrategic Advisory member of the Surgical PainConsortium. G.N. is the Secretary of theEnhanced Recovery After Surgery Society. Theremaining authors report no conflicts of interest.Corresponding author: Alon D. Altman, HBSc,MD. alon.altman@cancercare.mb.ca0002-9378/free? 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2020.07.039This is the first collaborative Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society guideline foroptimal perioperative care for vulvar and vaginal surgeries. An Embase and PubMeddatabase search of publications was performed. Studies on each topic within theEnhanced Recovery After Surgery vulvar and vaginal outline were selected, withemphasis on meta-analyses, randomized controlled trials, and prospective cohortstudies. All studies were reviewed and graded according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation system. All recommendations onthe Enhanced Recovery After Surgery topics are based on the best available evidence.The level of evidence for each item is presented.Key words: gynecology, Enhanced Recovery After Surgery, ERAS, vaginal surgery, vulvarsurgeryOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 475Special Report ajog.orgTABLE 1Recommendations, evidence level, and recommendation grade for individual ERAS elementsItem RecommendationEvidence level Recommendation gradeVulvar Vaginal Vulvar VaginalPreadmission information,education, and counselingPatients should routinely receive dedicatedpreoperative information, education, and counselingLow Low Strong StrongPreoperative optimization Routine removal of pubic hair should not be used todecrease infection ratesLow N/A Strong N/AIf hair is removed, it should be clipped and not shaved High N/A Strong N/AUse of preoperative vaginal estrogen inpostmenopausal women decreases postoperativecomplicationsN/A Low N/A WeakPreoperative bowelpreparationPreoperative bowel preparation should not be usedbefore vulvar and vaginal surgeryModerate Low Strong Weak (mayconsiderenema to reducestool burden)Prophylaxis againstthromboembolismPatients undergoing malignant procedures lasting >30min should receive dual mechanical prophylaxis andchemoprophylaxis with either low-molecular-weightheparin or unfractionated heparinModerate Moderate Strong StrongProphylaxis should be initiated preoperatively andcontinued throughout the hospital stay for malignantsurgeryModerate Low Strong StrongProphylaxis should be initiated preoperatively andcontinued throughout the hospital stay for benignsurgeryLow Low Weak WeakExtended postoperative prophylaxis Low Low Weak WeakAntimicrobial prophylaxis IV antibiotics should be administered routinely within60 min before vaginal hysterectomyN/A High N/A StrongAntibiotic prophylaxis may be considered for vaginalsurgery without hysterectomyN/A Low N/A WeakAntibiotic prophylaxis may be considered for vulvarsurgeryLow N/A Strong (radicalvulvectomy)N/AStandard anesthetic protocoland fluid managementUse of short-acting anesthetics Low Low Strong StrongObjective monitoring of the level of neuromuscularblock and ensuring complete reversalHigh High Strong StrongFluid balance to achieve euvolemia Moderate Moderate Strong StrongAltman. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society recommendations for vulvar and vaginal surgeries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020. (continued)Special Report ajog.org476 American Journal of Obstetrics& Gynecology OCTOBER 2020TABLE 1Recommendations, evidence level, and recommendation grade for individual ERAS elements (continued)Item RecommendationEvidence level Recommendation gradeVulvar Vaginal Vulvar VaginalPreemptive analgesia is recommended for vaginalsurgeryN/A Moderate N/A StrongUrinary drainage Retrograde bladder fill for voiding trial should beconsidered for vaginal proceduresN/A High N/A StrongUrinary catheters should be removed as soon aspossible for vaginal proceduresN/A High N/A StrongUrinary catheters should be removed as soon aspossible for vulvar proceduresLow N/A Strong N/APostoperative analgesia A multimodal postoperative analgesic protocol shouldbe used routinely, and home-going opioid prescriptionsshould be minimizedHigh High Strong StrongCombination of acetaminophen and nonsteroidalantiinflammatory drugs should be usedHigh High Strong StrongPreoperative andpostoperative nutritionPatients should be encouraged to eat a light snack upuntil 6 h and clear fluids (including oral carbohydratedrinks) up until 2 h, before initiation of anesthesiaHigh High Strong StrongA regular diet within the first 24 h after vaginal or vulvarsurgery is recommendedModerate (byindirectness)Moderate (byindirectness)Strong StrongPostoperative dressing care Vaginal packing does not decrease postoperativebleeding and hematoma formation or increasepostoperative painN/A High N/A StrongIf used, vaginal packing should not be left in for morethan 24 hN/A Low N/A StrongOcclusive dressings may be used after laser treatmentto promote healingLow N/A Weak N/APostoperative drains andadjuvant therapiesInguinofemoral drains should continue until <30e50cc/d of drainage (cancer surgery)Moderate N/A Strong N/ASaphenous vein preservation should be considered inall inguinofemoral lymph node dissections (cancersurgery)Moderate N/A Strong N/AERAS, Enhanced Recovery After Surgery; IV, intravenous; N/A, not applicable.Altman. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society recommendations for vulvar and vaginal surgeries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020.ajog.org Special ReportOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics& Gynecology 477guideline formation was not to obtain acomprehensive summary of all literaturebut to ensure that the most importantand current work is highlighted.6Quality assessmentThe quality of evidence and recommendations were assessed on the basis ofthe Grading of Recommendations,Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system, presented inTable 2 as per previous guidelines.3e5,7Each study included was assessed according to the GRADE criteria, and thefinal list of referenced studies wasdecided on by the guideline development group; although not all papers arereferenced in the final product, thestudies chosen are representative of thebest quality of evidence with thebroadest scope of application.6 Therecommendations are based on the levelof evidence as high, moderate, and low,equalized by desirable and deleteriouseffects. Strong recommendations meanthat the ERAS group believed that theadvantages of the recommendationsoutweighed the risks, whereas a weakrecommendation indicates that thegroup believed that the advantageslikely outweigh the risks but felt lessconfident in the overall strength of theevidence. As such, there may be cases inwhich strong recommendations arereached from low-evidence data andweak recommendations from strongevidence data.ResultsThe recommendations, evidence level,and recommendation grade are providedfor each of the individual ERAS elementsin Table 1, with summary descriptions ofthe evidence below with the associatedlevel of evidence in parentheses.Preadmission information, education,and counselingThe goal of preoperative education is notonly to physically prepare the patient forsurgery but also to prepare them forwhat to expect after the surgery. Preoperative preparation allows patients tobetter understand the procedure, feelmore in control, and experiencedecreased postoperative pain and anxiety and can even reduce the length ofhospital stay.8Information may be provided in manyforms¡Xverbal, written, or multimedia¡Xand should be adapted to cultural andsocial aspects. Written information wasfound to be superior to verbal alone in 1randomized trial for satisfaction, days ofhospitalization, and pain.9 However, theaddition of an educational videofor pelvicreconstructive surgery did not improvepatient preparedness for surgery.10RecommendationAlthough there is limited evidence in thisfield, most studies from other specialtiesprovide evidence of beneficial effects andno evidence of harm. It is therefore recommended that patients should routinelyreceive dedicated preoperative information, education, and counseling (Low).Preoperative optimizationIn the past, it has been postulated that ashair harbors bacteria, the removal of hairshould decrease surgical site infection (SSI)rates. A Cochrane review showed lack ofevidence supporting hair removal; however, there were no specific studies examining the removal of pubic hair.11 A smallstudy comparing perineal shaving withno hair removal showed no differencein infection rates.12 However, if pubic hairis removed to improve visualization ofthe surgical field, clipping should be usedover shaving to reduce the rate of SSIs.11The use of preoperative vaginal estrogen in postmenopausal women hasbeen shown to increase the maturationindex and vaginal epithelial thickness,but there is a lack of evidence that thistranslates to improved outcomes inprolapse surgery.13 An RCTusing vaginalestrogen before and 1 year after vaginalprolapse surgery with mesh found noestrogen to be noninferior to estrogentherapy when examining mesh erosionand anatomic success as endpoints.14RecommendationThe routine removal of pubic hair forvulvar surgery does not decrease infectionrates (Low). If hair is removed, it shouldbe clipped and not shaved (High). Thereis little evidence to support the use ofpreoperative vaginal estrogen inTABLE 2GRADE system rating of quality and strength of evidenceEvidence quality level DefinitionHigh Subsequent research unlikely to change confidence in estimate of effectModerate Subsequent research likely to have an impact on estimate of effect and may change estimateLow Subsequent research very likely to have an impact on estimate of effect and likely to change estimateVery low Any estimate is uncertainRecommendation level DefintionStrong Desirable effects of intervention clearly outweigh, or clearly do not outweigh, the undesirable effectsWeak Effects are much more unclearGRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation.Adapted from Guyatt et al.7Altman. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society recommendations for vulvar and vaginal surgeries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2020.Special Report ajog.org478 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology OCTOBER 2020postmenopausal women to decreasepostoperative complications (Low).Preoperative bowel preparationTraditionally, mechanical bowel preparation (MBP) in gynecologic surgery,especially in anticipation of potentialbowel resection, was believed to decreasethe risk of anastomotic leak and preventperioperative infectious morbidity.15 In2018, a meta-analysis of 21,568 patientsundergoing colorectal surgery showedthat MBP was not associated with anydifference in anastomotic leak rates, SSI,intraabdominal collection, reoperation,or hospital length of stay whencompared with no MBP.16 Similar conclusions were reached in a 2015 metaanalysis of 5 RCTs in gynecologic surgery.17 There are limited data in vaginalsurgery with the exception of a recentRCT that showed that women who underwent MBP before minimally invasivesacrocolpopexy demonstrated benefit topostoperative defecatory function andimproved surgeon¡¦s perceptions of thecase.18 Enemas, however, do not seem toadversely affect recovery or electrolytesand may be useful to reduce the stoolburden at the time of vaginal or vulvarprocedures, although no further dataexist on the rates of infection.RecommendationPreoperative bowel preparation is notrecommended before vulvar (Moderate)and vaginal (Low) surgeries; enemasmay be considered to reduce the stoolburden at the time of vaginal surgery.Prophylaxis against venousthromboembolismThe literature suggests that the risk ofvenous thromboembolism (VTE) invulvar and vaginal cancer surgeries issimilar to that observed among patientsundergoing surgery for other gynecologiccancers.19 The formulation of guidelinesis complicated by wide variations in surgical complexity for vulvar procedures,ranging from outpatient laser ablationand limited wide local excisions to radicalresections with inguinal lymphadenectomy and potential reconstruction. In anevaluation using the American College ofSurgeons National Surgical QualityImprovement Program (ACS-NSQIP)database, the 30-day rate of deep veinthrombosis and/or pulmonary embolismwas 1.2% in 497 patients undergoingsurgery for vulvar cancer compared with3.0%, 1.4%, and 1.5% for ovarian, cervical, and endometrial cancers, respectively.20 However, less than a third ofpatients undergoing vulvar resection hada concurrent inguinal lymphadenectomy,suggesting that many of these patients hadpreinvasive or microinvasive disease, andthe VTE rate may therefore be underestimated. A single-institution study overa 10-year period reported on 219 patientswith vulvar cancer and 141 with vaginalcancer (including resection for Pagetdisease), only 5 of whom were notcomprehensively staged.19 Perhapsbecause of a higher rate of lymphadenectomy or longer follow-up, the rates ofVTE were higher than those reported inthe ACS-NSQIP, 3.7% for vulvar cancerand 0.7% for vaginal cancer. Patients werepurported to have received prophylaxiswith stockings and low-molecular-weightheparin (LMWH) from 48 hours to 14days postoperatively, but no assessmentof compliance was provided.Patients undergoing surgery for vulvaror vaginal cancer should therefore receivedual VTE mechanical prophylaxis andchemoprophylaxis with either LMWH orunfractionated heparin (UFH) to beginbefore the induction of anesthesia as recommended by the American Society ofClinical Oncology (ASCO).21 Dual prophylaxis should continue throughout thehospital stay. In keeping with ASCO recommendations, procedures lasting >30minutes should be managed as describedabove. In contrast to patients withadvanced ovarian cancer, the residual tumor burden for patients with vulvar andvaginal cancers is quite low; no data existfor prolapse or benign procedures. Forthis reason, it is premature to recommendroutine extended prophylaxis for thesepatients, although it may be considered inelderly, frail, and immobile patientsdepending on their Caprini scores.22In benign vaginal surgery, the datacontinue to be limited as well. In a largeretrospective analysis of NSQIP data,26,103 women who underwent surgeryfor pelvic organ prolapse were evaluatedfor VTE; 81.7% had a vaginal approach.The overall rate of VTE in this populationwas <1% for all groups, with the vaginalgroup having the lowest rate of 0.17%(P<.01).23 A second similar study for20,687 women with pelvic reconstructivesurgery showed a rate of VTE of 0.1%.24Summary and recommendationPatients undergoing procedures lasting>30 minutes should receive dual mechanical prophylaxis and chemoprophylaxis with either LMWH or UFH forcancer surgery (Moderate). Prophylaxisshould be initiated preoperatively andcontinued throughout the hospital stayfor malignant surgery (vulva, Moderate;vaginal, Low). In benign vaginal andvulvar surgeries, the rates of VTE are verylow, but prophylaxis may still be considered (Low). Studies on extended postoperative prophylaxis are needed invulvar and vaginal surgeries for bothmalignant and benign indications (Low).Antimicrobial prophylaxisIt is well established that patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy, similarto abdominal hysterectomy, shouldreceive single-dose antimicrobial prophylaxis within 1 hour of incision.25 ACochrane review showed that comparedwith placebo, women who receivedantimicrobial prophylaxis for vaginalhysterectomy had a reduction in totalpostoperative infections, including urinary tract infections (UTIs).26For patients undergoing vaginal surgery without hysterectomy, such as withanterior or posterior colporrhaphy, theevidence for antimicrobial prophylaxis isless clear. Although theoretically therecould be benefit from prophylaxis inthese cases given that they are classifiedas clean-contaminated, at the presenttime, there is insufficient evidence tomake concrete recommendations; thus,the decision is left to the discretion of thesurgeon.27 Although this appears to besimilar for patients undergoing a vaginalsurgery with the use of mesh (eg, midurethral sling) where infection rates arevery low,28,29 93% of surgeons said theyadministered some form of antibioticprophylaxis when graft material wasused in prolapse surgery.30ajog.org Special ReportOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 479Vulvar procedures such as vulvectomy, which are typically performed forcancer, are associated with a high risk ofinfection. Radical vulvectomy has an SSIrate comparable with that of patientsundergoing abdominal hysterectomywith a type IV wound.31,32 Similar tovaginal surgery without hysterectomy,there is no randomized evidence supporting antimicrobial prophylaxis in thissetting. However, given the high rate ofSSI, it seems reasonable to give a singledose of antibiotic, consistent with otherpublished guidelines.25RecommendationIntravenous (IV) antibiotics should beadministered routinely within 60 minutesbefore vaginal hysterectomy (High). IVantibiotics should be considered forvaginal surgery without hysterectomy(Low) and vulvar procedures (Low),particularly radical vulvectomy (contaminated wound), where SSI rates are high.Standard anesthetic protocol and fluidmanagementThe anesthetic protocol for patientsundergoing major vulvar and vaginalsurgeries is conducted with the aim ofproviding anesthesia that reduces thesurgical stress response, provides analgesia, and encourages the rapid return ofmobilization, eating, and drinking. Inaddition, postoperative nausea andvomiting (PONV) with multimodalprophylaxis in this high-risk group ofpatients is required. Extremes of fluidbalance and organ dysfunction should beavoided.33,34For many patients, either general orregional anesthesia can be used; there islittle evidence to recommend one technique over the other. If general anesthesia is chosen, maintenance can beprovided with either a volatile-basedapproach or total IV anesthesia (TIVA).Nitrous oxide is not recommendedbecause of increased nausea and vomiting.35,36 There is much enthusiasm forTIVA over volatile anesthesia because itreduces the incidence of PONV and mayimprove long-term survival in patientswith malignancy.37 If TIVA is used,processed electroencephalogram monitoring (eg, bispectral index) isrecommended to ensure appropriatedepth of intraoperative anesthesia,permitting rapid return of consciousness.38 If neuromuscular (NM) blockingdrugs are used, then complete reversal ofNM function must be confirmed at theend of the procedure with objective NMmonitoring. The use of protective mechanical ventilation with tidal volume of6 to 8 mL/kg and the use of positive endexpiratory pressure may be of benefit.5Regional anesthesia (such as intrathecal or epidural) can provide excellentintraoperative and postoperative analgesia. However, side effects such as motor block, hypotension, and urinaryretention limit their postoperative use. Ifan epidural catheter has been used, itshould be discontinued soon after thesurgery because analgesic requirementsare generally modest. There is little evidence to support other modalities suchas ketamine, lidocaine, alpha-2 agonists,and pregabalin, although some advocatethe use of these drugs if undertakingopioid-free anesthesia to reduce theproblems associated with opioids,particularly opioid tolerance and opioidinduced hyperalgesia.39 Three smallRCTs have shown efficacy of preemptiveparacervical block in patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy.40,41 A numberof series have indicated that local anesthesia with sedation can be successfullyused for vaginal prolapse surgery.42Fluid management should be directedtoward replacing intraoperative bloodloss while aiming for euvolemia to avoidthe problems associated with fluidoverload (eg, edema, ileus) or hypovolemia (eg, acute kidney injury).Maintenance of blood pressure onceeuvolemia is achieved should be withvasoactive drugs to avoid fluid overload.The use of cardiac output monitoringand/or goal directed therapy is notroutinely recommended.43RecommendationThe use of short-acting anesthetics(Low), monitoring of NM block depth,and complete reversal (High) is recommended. Fluid balance should bedirected with the goal of euvolemia(Moderate). Preemptive analgesia isrecommended for vaginal hysterectomyand can be considered for vaginal prolapse surgery (Moderate).Urinary drainageImmediate postoperative voidingdysfunction is potentially a complicationof most pelvic surgeries. It is a particularproblem for procedures targeting theurethra such as surgeries for stress urinary incontinence. It is such a commonissue that some centers routinely teachpatients how to perform clean intermittent self-catheterization as part of thepreoperative teaching. After stress incontinence surgeries such as midurethralsling, bladder emptying is assessed with avoiding trial (VT). VT involvesmeasuring voided volume followed byan assessment of the postvoid residualvolume. There are multiple methods offilling the bladder before a VT, such asfilling the bladder in the operating room(OR) to a defined volume, retrogradecatheter fill in the postanesthesia careunit (PACU), or awaiting spontaneousbladder fill in the PACU. Foster et al44performed a randomized trial evaluating bladder function after outpatientvaginal surgery and found that patientswere more likely to successfully void after a retrograde fill compared withspontaneous bladder fill (61.5% vs32.1%, respectively; P?.02). In a subsequent trial, Myers et al45 documentedthat retrograde filling the bladder in theOR rather than in the PACU was aneffective strategy for the postoperativeVT. However, this approach did notsignificantly reduce total PACU time. Inboth studies, the retrograde bladder fillmethod was demonstrated to be moreaccurate and preferred by patients andalso enabled women to be dischargedfrom the PACU up to 27 minutes earlier.A small randomized prospective studyexamined catheterization in 100 womenundergoing vaginal hysterectomy andfound that catheterization after surgerywas unnecessary, but there were noincreased complications if left in for 24hours.46 In women undergoing Burchcolposuspension, a randomized trialreviewed the removal of catheter onpostoperative days 1 vs 5 and found nobenefit for prolonged catheterization.47A randomized trial in patientsSpecial Report ajog.org480 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology OCTOBER 2020undergoing vaginal prolapse surgery,with the removal of catheter on postoperative days 1 vs 5, again found nobenefit to prolonged catheterization,with a higher rate of positive cultures,prolonged hospitalization, and increasedrecatherization rate in the day 5 group.48A Cochrane review was performed in200649 on short-term catheterizationpolicies and included 39 RCTs with aheterogeneous mixture of surgeries,including vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy, anterior or posterior repairs,Burch colposuspension, and urologicalsurgery; the length of catheterizationalso varied from 1 to 28 days. The reviewfound that not using a catheter had anincreased risk of recatheterization;similarly urethral catheterization had ahigh risk of recatheterization comparedwith a suprapubic approach afterremoval.49,50 In 11 trials, shorter catheterization resulted in a lower rate of infections. Finally, using a clamp-releaseprotocol resulted in a higher risk ofinfection and delay of normal urinationthan an immediate release policy.49RecommendationRetrograde bladder filling for VT shouldbe considered in vaginal surgery becauseit seems to be preferred by patients andmay shorten time in the PACU (High).Urinary catheters should be used forpostoperative bladder drainage in complex vaginal surgery but may be safelyeliminated in simple vaginal hysterectomy. Removal after a short periodpostoperatively seems to be associatedwith lower rates of recatheterization,bladder infection, and length of stay(vaginal, High; vulvar, Low). Thesuprapubic route is associated with alower rate of bladder infection buthigher rate of catheter-related complications and may be considered if prolonged catheterization is expected. Thereremain insufficient data on urinarydrainage in vulvar surgery.Postoperative analgesiaPatients presenting with vulvar andvaginal abnormalities requiring surgicalresection frequently complain of pain; inparticular, those with ulcerative or malignant lesions may already be receivingpreoperative analgesics and are oftenanxious about control of their postoperative pain. However, removal of thelesion usually reduces pain significantly,even when large resections are needed,and postoperative pain control is rarelyproblematic. Published studies evaluating optimal control of postoperativepain in patients undergoing vulvar procedures are nonexistent, but the paradigm of multimodal, opioid-sparingpostoperative analgesia used commonlywithin the ERAS pathways should also beused for these patients as well.51 Inaddition, the postoperative strategyshould be reviewed with patients beforesurgery to aid optimal pain control andfunctional recovery and to minimizenausea, sedation, fatigue, and risk ofopioid addiction.52The use of preoperative oral acetaminophen and an antiinflammatorydrug (if not contraindicated) has beenshown to reduce opioid requirements andshould be a routine element in all ERASpathways.53,54 Because patients undergoing vulvar procedures, particularly patients with vulvar cancer, tend to beelderly, anticonvulsant medications andchronic pain drugs should not routinelybe used in the PACU.55,56 The use of localanesthetic medication may be feasibleinto the wound edges, but its use inregional anesthetic techniques, forexample, caudal epidural anesthesia is notadvocated, as it may be associated withpostoperative problems such as hypotension and urinary retention for vulvarprocedures. For vaginal surgery, there issome support for using local anesthetics,especially for paracervical and vaginalcuff blocks54,57; liposomal bupivacainemay be helpful but still requires furtherstudy.54,58 Postoperatively, patientsshould receive scheduled oral acetaminophen and ibuprofen, oral opioids asneeded, and IV opioids for breakthroughpain. Given the rarity of severe pain in thispopulation, patients with breakthroughpain should be carefully examined forinfections, wound breakdown, or othercomplications. Patients who do notrequire opioids in hospital will notrequire home-going opioid prescriptionsand should be counseled to continuescheduled ibuprofen and acetaminophen.For patients requiring home-going opioids, we recommend a prescription forthe minimum duration, for example, 10tablets of oxycodone 5 mg to minimizethe risk of opioid dependence anddiversion.59RecommendationA multimodal postoperative analgesicprotocol should be used routinely, andhome-going opioid prescriptions shouldbe minimized (High).Preoperative and postoperativenutritionHistorically, surgical patients have beensubjected to the ¡§nothing per orem aftermidnight¡¨ rule preoperatively with nosupporting evidence. In fact, adoption ofmodern fasting rules whereby a patient isallowed to have a light snack up until 6hours and clear fluids (including oralcarbohydrate drinks) up until 2 hoursbefore surgery has been shown to besafe.60 Furthermore, administration oforal carbohydrates preoperatively isassociated with improved preoperativewell-being and reduced postoperativeinsulin resistance.61 There remain nospecific trials in vulvar or vaginal surgery, but the underlying principles fromlaparotomy can be broadly adopted hereuntil further research is completed.Similarly, in the past, it was commonpractice to withhold food from postoperative patients until passage of flatus.Early feeding, whereby nutrition isintroduced within 24 hours after gynecologic surgery, has been shown to be safewithout increased gastrointestinalconcern or postoperative complications.62 This approach is associated withearlier return of bowel function, shorterlength of hospital stay, and improvedpatient satisfaction. A number of studieshave now successfully and safely incorporated these perioperative nutritionalpractices into their urogynecologic ERASprotocols. Finally, there is little concernfor ileus in patients undergoing vulvar orvaginal surgery,63,64 which furtherstrengthens an early refeeding approach.RecommendationPatients should be encouraged to eat alight snack up until 6 hours and clearajog.org Special ReportOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 481fluids (including oral carbohydratedrinks) up until 2 hours before theinitiation of anesthesia (High). A regulardiet within the first 24 hours after vaginalor vulvar surgery is recommended onthe basis of extrapolation from largermore invasive procedures (Moderate byindirectness).Postoperative dressing careVaginal packing is thought to decreasepostoperative vaginal and vault hematoma formation and consequentlydecrease infection rates in prolapse surgery. However, it has been suggested thatpacking also increases pain, prolongshospitalization, and can lead to leavingpacking accidentally in place, resulting inretained ¡§foreign objects.¡¨ Recent trendshave been to use vaginal packing for 24hours postoperatively,65 which requiresindwelling catheterization. One RCTinvolving 190 women examined outcomes at 24 hours postoperatively forpatients packed with proflavine-soakedcotton gauze vs no packing and foundno difference in pain scores, infectiousmorbidity, or hematoma formation(7.3% in pack group vs 14.8% in no packgroup; P?.204).66 A second small RCTshowed similar pain on a visual analogscale but less use of ketorolac in the first24 hours and nursing-reported pain inthe packing group.67 Two RCTs investigated the length of time for packing andfound no difference between 3 hours and24 hours; there was no difference infebrile morbidity and complications, butshorter packing was associated withnonsignificantly higher urinary retention rates.68,69Although no specific research hasbeen conducted for patients undergoinglaser treatment of the vulva, severalstudies have examined the role ofocclusive dressings after laser skinresurfacing. A small retrospective studyof open wound care compared withperforated silicone occlusive dressingfound a decrease in the rate of erythema,swelling, and crusting.70 Occlusivedressings may promote reepithelialization and improve wound healing bycreating a moist environment.71e73Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)dressings have also occasionally beenused for the closure of radically excisedperineal and vulvar wounds.73e80 Oneinvestigation retrospectively examined54 patients with VAC compared withstandard postoperative care in patientsafter radical excisions and found adecrease in time to complete healing(44.4 vs 60.2 days; P?.0175).80 Anothergroup retrospectively assessed 24 patients with penile or urethral cancerrequiring inguinofemoral lymph nodedissections and found decreased rates ofhospitalization, lymphocele, persistentlymphorrhea, and lymphedema with theuse of VAC.81 Contamination with stooland urine must be avoided when VACdressings are applied to the vulva andperineum; immediate treatment solutions have included the use of Foleycatheters, antimotility agents (eg, Imodium and codeine), rectal tubes, andwaterproof dressings (eg, DuoDERM).75,77 VAC dressings have alsobeen used in complicated inguinalincisions.73,78,82e84 Although it continues to be common practice, there areno high-quality studies examining theutility of silver sulfadiazine cream afterthe laser vaporization of the vulva.RecommendationVaginal packing does not seem todecrease postoperative bleeding and hematoma formation or increase postoperative pain (High). Vaginal packingmay result in an increase in postoperative infection rates when left forlonger than 24 hours (Low) and longeruse of packing results in longer catheterization and thus higher rates of UTI.Occlusive dressings may be used afterlaser treatment to promote healing(Low).Postoperative drains and adjuvanttherapiesPostoperative drains after systematicinguinofemoral lymph node (IFLN)dissection are used routinely and oftenleft in situ until producing <20 to 50 mLper 24 hours,85e89 with some recommendations to leave the drains in place atleast 5 to 7 days postoperatively.73,90,91This is thought to decrease lymphocystformation by allowing the overlying skinflaps to adhere to the underlyingconnective tissue.85 Separate vulvardrainage has been abandoned by most.32Adjuvant products such as fibrin sealantand albumin-glutaraldehyde adhesivehave not been proven to decreasemorbidity.73,92e94 The preservation ofthe saphenous vein seems to reduce therate of lymphedema, cellulitis, anddehiscence.95Multiple retrospective studies haveinvestigated time-based or volumebased IFLN drainage to guide drainremoval, with no definitive conclusions.Overall, short duration of use (<3 days)was associated with higher rates ofwound breakdown, whereas longerduration of use (>7 days) was associatedwith higher rates of lymphedema.86Drain use has also been shown to beassociated with higher rates of cellulitis.96 Another investigation showedthat higher drain output on the final daybefore removal was a risk factor forcomplications, including lymphoceleformation.91 Two prospective studiesdemonstrated that removal once theoutput had decreased to <30 to 50 cc perday resulted in lower rates of lymphoceleformation and other complications. Noprospective studies have evaluateddrainage after inguinal sentinel lymphnode biopsy in women with vulvarcancer.There were no studies examining therole of surgical drains for vaginal orprolapse surgery.Novel postoperative therapiesRoutine postoperative vulvar care forradical vulvar excisions often consists ofirrigation and perineal drying witheither a hair dryer or vulvar blower orfan.73,80 However, no studies have beenidentified showing efficacy for thispractice.A small RCT was performed ongranulocyte colony-stimulating factor(G-CSF) vs placebo in 40 patients undergoing vulvar cancer resection basedon an earlier retrospective study.97 Theauthors found no difference in rates ofwound infection between the groups,with increased cost associated with GCSF. Adjuvant platelet gel has beenstudied in a retrospective study98 appliedto the vaginal resection portion of theSpecial Report ajog.org482 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology OCTOBER 2020radical vulvectomy; the platelet gel grouphad significantly fewer wound complications; no prospective or randomizedtrials have been performed.Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) has beenused to improve tissue oxygenation,thereby stimulating healing and angiogenesis. Investigation of HBO in patientsundergoing radical vulvectomy showedsignificantly less wound breakdowncompared with historical controls(P?.0105).89,99 Although HBO is a verypromising treatment that is commonlyused, further trials must be performed todemonstrate efficacy of this expensivetherapy.Zinc has been shown to be necessaryfor the early stages of repair, and oralsupplementation is thought to restoresubclinically low levels. A pilot studyinvestigated the dosage of zinc sulfate220 mg orally 3 times daily for 7 dayspreoperatively in patients undergoingradical vulvectomy and lymphadenectomy. The authors showed a decreasedrate of wound dehiscence and a reducedhospital stay from 37 to 18 days.73RecommendationThe drainage of inguinal lymph nodedissection should continue until <30 to50 cc per day of drainage (Moderate).Saphenous vein preservation should beconsidered in IFLN dissection(Moderate).CommentThis guideline summarizes current evidence examined by the ERAS SocietyGynecology Chapter on recommendations for the elements of pre-, intra-, andpostoperative care in vulvar and vaginalsurgeries. In several instances, wheregood quality data were not available,recommendations were made on thebasis of other surgical disciplines and theoriginal ERAS gynecologic oncologyguidelines. The guideline committeedecided to combine vulvar and vaginalsurgeries because these surgeries arecommon approaches in practice forgeneral gynecology and subspecialties,including urogynecology and gynecologic oncology. The authors believed thatthe perioperative care for both wassimilar, and the differences have beenhighlighted in the aforementioned sections. As ERAS guidelines are created byreviewing all the current and updatedliterature, including systematic reviews,meta-analyses, RCTs, retrospectivestudies, and studies in similar disciplines, it does not follow the same process as a systematic review of looking atonly specialty-specific randomized trials.The advantages of this process includeusing any relevant information that iscurrently available, which is thenreviewed by an international panel ofexperts. The disadvantages are that someof the recommendations are based onexpert opinion and low levels ofevidence.This guideline summarizes the bestevidence in common practices for vulvarand vaginal surgeries but recognizes thepaucity of evidence specific to this area intopics such as ileus prevention, postoperative diet, and mobilization. Wehope that these guidelines will helpexpand ERAS protocols into gynecologicsurgeries outside of the realm of laparotomy or laparoscopy, helping improvepatient outcome, optimize hospital stay,and reduce systemic costs. -REFERENCES1. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhancedrecovery after surgery: a review. JAMA Surg2017;152:292¡V8.2. Ljungqvist O, Thanh NX, Nelson G. ERASvalue based surgery. J Surg Oncol 2017;116:608¡V12.3. Nelson G, Altman AD, Nick A, et al. Guidelinesfor pre- and intra-operative care in gynecologic/oncology surgery: Enhanced Recovery AfterSurgery (ERAS) Society recommendations¡Xpart I. Gynecol Oncol 2016;140:313¡V22.4. Nelson G, Altman AD, Nick A, et al. Guidelinesfor postoperative care in gynecologic/oncologysurgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery(ERAS) Society recommendations¡Xpart II.Gynecol Oncol 2016;140:323¡V32.5. Nelson G, Bakkum-Gamez J, Kalogera E,et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in gynecologic/oncology: Enhanced Recovery AfterSurgery (ERAS) Society recommendations2019 update. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2019;29:651¡V68.6. Brindle M, Nelson G, Lobo DN, Ljungqvist O,Gustafsson UO. Recommendations from theERAS Society for standards for the development of enhanced recovery after surgeryguidelines. BJS Open 2020;4:157¡V63.7. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al.GRADE: an emerging consensus on ratingquality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924¡V6.8. Powell R, Scott NW, Manyande A, et al.Psychological preparation and postoperativeoutcomes for adults undergoing surgery undergeneral anaesthesia. Cochrane Database SystRev 2016;5:CD008646.9. Angioli R, Plotti F, Capriglione S, et al. Theeffects of giving patients verbal or written preoperative information in gynecologic oncologysurgery: a randomized study and the medicallegal point of view. Eur J Obstet GynecolReprod Biol 2014;177:67¡V71.10. Greene KA, Wyman AM, Scott LA, Hart S,Hoyte L, Bassaly R. Evaluation of patient preparedness for surgery: a randomized controlledtrial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;217:179.e1¡V7.11. Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K. Preoperativehair removal to reduce surgical site infection.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;11:CD004122.12. Adeleye JA. Perineovulvovaginal preoperative preparation in minor gynecological surgery.Int Surg 1976;61:467.13. Rahn DD, Ward RM, Sanses TV, et al.Vaginal estrogen use in postmenopausalwomen with pelvic floor disorders: systematicreview and practice guidelines. Int Urogynecol J2015;26:3¡V13.14. Sun Z, Zhu L, Xu T, Shi X, Lang J. Effects ofpreoperative vaginal estrogen therapy for theincidence of mesh complication after pelvic organ prolapse surgery in postmenopausalwomen: is it helpful or a myth? A 1-year randomized controlled trial. Menopause 2016;23:740¡V8.15. Fanning J, Valea FA. Perioperative bowelmanagement for gynecologic surgery. Am JObstet Gynecol 2011;205:309¡V14.16. Rollins KE, Javanmard-Emamghissi H,Lobo DN. Impact of mechanical bowel preparation in elective colorectal surgery: a metaanalysis. World J Gastroenterol 2018;24:519¡V36.17. Arnold A, Aitchison LP, Abbott J. Preoperative mechanical bowel preparation for abdominal, laparoscopic, and vaginal surgery: asystematic review. J Minim Invasive Gynecol2015;22:737¡V52.18. Sassani JC, Kantartzis K, Wu L, Fabio A,Zyczynski HM. Bowel preparation prior to minimally invasive sacrocolpopexy: a randomizedcontrolled trial. Int Urogynecol J 2020;31:1305¡V13.19. Ye S, Zhang W, Yang J, et al. Pattern ofvenous thromboembolism occurrence in gynecologic malignancy: incidence, timing, and distribution a 10-year retrospective singleinstitutional study. Medicine (Baltimore)2015;94:e2316.20. Graul A, Latif N, Zhang X, et al. Incidence ofvenous thromboembolism by type of gynecologic malignancy and surgical modality in theNational Surgical Quality Improvement Program.Int J Gynecol Cancer 2017;27:581¡V7.21. Lyman GH, Khorana AA, Kuderer NM, et al.Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis andajog.org Special ReportOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 483treatment in patients with cancer: AmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology clinical practiceguideline update. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:2189¡V204.22. Caprini JA, Arcelus JI, Hasty JH,Tamhane AC, Fabrega F. Clinical assessment ofvenous thromboembolic risk in surgical patients.Semin Thromb Hemost 1991;17(Suppl 3):304¡V12.23. Hokenstad ED, Habermann EB,Glasgow AE, Occhino JA. Risk of venousthromboembolism in patients undergoing surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. Int Urogynecol J2016;27:1525¡V8.24. Mueller MG, Pilecki MA, Catanzarite T,Jain U, Kim JYS, Kenton K. Venous thromboembolism in reconstructive pelvic surgery. Am JObstet Gynecol 2014;211:552.e1¡V6.25. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG Practice Bulletin no. 195summary: prevention of infection after gynecologic procedures. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:1177¡V9.26. Ayeleke RO, Mourad S, Marjoribanks J,Calis KA, Jordan V. Antibiotic prophylaxis forelective hysterectomy. Cochrane Database SystRev 2017;6:CD004637.27. Morrill MY, Schimpf MO, Abed H, et al.Antibiotic prophylaxis for selected gynecologicsurgeries. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2013;120:10¡V5.28. Harmanli O, Hong EK, Rubin R, Jones KA,Boyer RL, Metz S. Is antibiotic prophylaxisnecessary for midurethral sling procedures? Aseries of 174 cases without preoperative antibiotics. Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:621¡V3.29. Shepherd JP, Jones KA, Harmanli O. Isantibiotic prophylaxis necessary before midurethral sling procedures for female stress incontinence? A decision analysis. Int UrogynecolJ 2014;25:227¡V33.30. Schimpf MO, Morrill MY, Margulies RU,Ward RM, Carberry CL, Sung VW. Surgeonpractice patterns for antibiotic prophylaxis ingynecologic surgery. Female Pelvic MedReconstr Surg 2012;18:281¡V5.31. Mert I, Cliby WA, Bews KA, Habermann EB,Dowdy SC. Evidence-based wound classification for vulvar surgery: implications for riskadjustment. Gynecol Oncol 2019;154:280¡V2.32. Leminen A, Forss M, Paavonen J. Woundcomplications in patients with carcinoma of thevulva. Comparison between radical and modified vulvectomies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol ReprodBiol 2000;93:193¡V7.33. Trowbridge ER, Dreisbach CN,Sarosiek BM, et al. Review of enhanced recovery programs in benign gynecologic surgery. IntUrogynecol J 2018;29:3¡V11.34. Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G, et al.Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) forgastrointestinal surgery, part 2: consensusstatement for anaesthesia practice. ActaAnaesthesiol Scand 2016;60:289¡V334.35. Fern?ndez-Guisasola J, G?mez-Arnau JI,Cabrera Y, del Valle SG. Association betweennitrous oxide and the incidence of postoperativenausea and vomiting in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Anaesthesia 2010;65:379¡V87.36. Myles PS, Leslie K, Chan MT, et al. Thesafety of addition of nitrous oxide to generalanaesthesia in at-risk patients having majornon-cardiac surgery (ENIGMA-II): a randomised, single-blind trial. Lancet 2014;384:1446¡V54.37. Wigmore TJ, Mohammed K, Jhanji S. Longterm survival for patients undergoing volatileversus IV anesthesia for cancer surgery: aretrospective analysis. Anesthesiology2016;124:69¡V79.38. Punjasawadwong Y, Phongchiewboon A,Bunchungmongkol N. Bispectral index forimproving anaesthetic delivery and postoperative recovery. Cochrane Database SystRev 2014;6:CD003843.39. Liu H, Brown M, Sun L, et al. Complicationsand liability related to regional and neuraxialanesthesia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol2019;33:487¡V97.40. O¡¦Neal MG, Beste T, Shackelford DP. Utilityof preemptive local analgesia in vaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:1539¡V41; discussion 1541e2.41. Hristovska AM, Kristensen BB,Rasmussen MA, et al. Effect of systematic localinfiltration analgesia on postoperative pain invaginal hysterectomy: a randomized, placebocontrolled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand2014;93:233¡V8.42. Buchsbaum GM, Duecy EE. Local anesthesia with sedation for transvaginal correctionof advanced genital prolapse. Am J ObstetGynecol 2005;193:2173¡V6.43. Miller TE, Roche AM, Mythen M. Fluidmanagement and goal-directed therapy as anadjunct to Enhanced Recovery After Surgery(ERAS). Can J Anesth 2015;62:158¡V68.44. Foster RT Sr, Borawski KM, South MM,Weidner AC, Webster GD, Amundsen CL.A randomized, controlled trial evaluating 2techniques of postoperative bladder testing aftertransvaginal surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol2007;197:627.e1¡V4.45. Myers EM, Matthews CA, Crane AK,Connolly A, Wu JM, Geller EJ. Two techniquesfor assessing postoperative voiding function, arandomized trial. Int Urogynecol J 2017;28:1567¡V72.46. Summitt RL Jr, Stovall TG, Bran DF. Prospective comparison of indwelling bladdercatheter drainage versus no catheter aftervaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol1994;170:1815¡V8; discussion 1818e21.47. Sun MJ, Chang SY, Lin KC, Chen GD. Is anindwelling catheter necessary for bladderdrainage after modified Burch colposuspension? Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct2004;15:203¡V7.48. Hakvoort RA, Elberink R, Vollebregt A,Ploeg T, Emanuel MH. How long should urinarybladder catheterisation be continued aftervaginal prolapse surgery? A randomisedcontrolled trial comparing short term versus longterm catheterisation after vaginal prolapse surgery. BJOG 2004;111:828¡V30.49. Phipps S, Lim YN, McClinton S, Barry C,Rane A, N¡¦Dow J. Short term urinary catheterpolicies following urogenital surgery in adults.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;2:CD004374.50. Kidd EA, Stewart F, Kassis NC, Hom E,Omar MI. Urethral (indwelling or intermittent) orsuprapubic routes for short-term catheterisationin hospitalised adults. Cochrane Database SystRev 2015;12:CD004203.51. Meyer LA, Lasala J, Iniesta MD, et al. Effectof an enhanced recovery after surgery programon opioid use and patient-reported outcomes.Obstet Gynecol 2018;132:281¡V90.52. Dolin SJ, Cashman JN. Tolerability of acutepostoperative pain management: nausea,vomiting, sedation, pruritus, and urinary retention. Evidence from published data. Br J Anaesth2005;95:584¡V91.53. Ong CKS, Seymour RA, Lirk P, Merry AF.Combining paracetamol (acetaminophen) withnonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs: a qualitative systematic review of analgesic efficacy foracute postoperative pain. Anesth Analg2010;110:1170¡V9.54. Long JB, Bevil K, Giles DL. Preemptiveanalgesia in minimally invasive gynecologic surgery. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 2019;26:198¡V218.55. Doleman B, Heinink TP, Read DJ,Faleiro RJ, Lund JN, Williams JP. A systematicreview and meta-regression analysis of prophylactic gabapentin for postoperative pain.Anaesthesia 2015;70:1186¡V204.56. Weingarten TN, Jacob AK, Njathi CW,Wilson GA, Sprung J. Multimodal analgesicprotocol and postanesthesia respiratorydepression during phase I recovery after totaljoint arthroplasty. Reg Anesth Pain Med2015;40:330¡V6.57. Blanton E, Lamvu G, Patanwala I, et al. Nonopioid pain management in benign minimallyinvasive hysterectomy: a systematic review. AmJ Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:557¡V67.58. Jones CL, Gruber DD, Fischer JR,Leonard K, Hernandez SL. Liposomal bupivacaine efficacy for postoperative pain followingposterior vaginal surgery: a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J ObstetGynecol 2018;219:500.e1¡V8.59. Glaser GE, Kalogera E, Kumar A, et al.Outcomes and patient perspectives followingimplementation of tiered opioid prescriptionguidelines in gynecologic surgery. GynecolOncol 2020;157:476¡V81.60. Brady M, Kinn S, Stuart P. Preoperativefasting for adults to prevent perioperative complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev2003;4:CD004423.61. Nygren J, Thorell A, Ljungqvist O. Preoperative oral carbohydrate therapy. Curr OpinAnaesthesiol 2015;28:364¡V9.62. Charoenkwan K, Matovinovic E. Earlyversus delayed oral fluids and food for reducingcomplications after major abdominal gynaecologicSpecial Report ajog.org484 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology OCTOBER 2020surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;2014:CD004508.63. Kalogera E, Bakkum-Gamez JN,Jankowski CJ, et al. Enhanced recovery in gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:319¡V28.64. Carter-Brooks CM, Du AL, Ruppert KM,Romanova AL, Zyczynski HM. Implementationof a urogynecology-specific enhanced recoveryafter surgery (ERAS) pathway. Am J ObstetGynecol 2018;219:495.e1¡V10.65. Baggish MS, Karram MM. Atlas of pelvicanatomy and gynecologic surgery, 3rd ed.Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2010.66. Thiagamoorthy G, Khalil A, Cardozo L,Srikrishna S, Leslie G, Robinson D. The value ofvaginal packing in pelvic floor surgery: a randomised double-blind study. Int Urogynecol J2014;25:585¡V91.67. Westermann LB, Crisp CC, Oakley SH, et al.To pack or not to pack? A randomized trial ofvaginal packing after vaginal reconstructivesurgery. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg2016;22:111¡V7.68. Glavind K, M?rup L, Madsen H, Glavind J.A prospective, randomised, controlled trialcomparing 3 hour and 24 hour postoperativeremoval of bladder catheter and vaginal packfollowing vaginal prolapse surgery. Acta ObstetGynecol Scand 2007;86:1122¡V5.69. Rajan P, Soundara Raghavan S, Sharma D.Study comparing 3 hour and 24 hour postoperative removal of bladder catheter andvaginal pack following vaginal surgery: a randomised controlled trial. BMC Womens Health2017;17:78.70. Batra RS, Ort RJ, Jacob C, Hobbs L,Arndt KA, Dover JS. Evaluation of a siliconeocclusive dressing after laser skin resurfacing.Arch Dermatol 2001;137:1317¡V21.71. Newman JP, Fitzgerald P, Koch RJ. Reviewof closed dressings after laser resurfacing. Dermatol Surg 2000;26:562¡V71.72. Collawn SS. Occlusion following laserresurfacing promotes reepithelialization andwound healing. Plast Reconstr Surg 2000;105:2180¡V9.73. Altman AD, Robinson C. Vulvar postoperative care, gestalt or evidence based medicine? A comprehensive systematic review.Gynecol Oncol 2017;145:386¡V92.74. Dhar R, Copson D, Williamson K,Nunns D. Use of topical negative pressure toclose a large MRSA-infected groin woundfollowing vulvectomy. J Wound Care2006;15:312¡V3.75. Shvartsman HS, Langstein H, Worley C,Malpica A, Ramondetta LM. Use of a vacuumassisted closure device in the treatment ofrecurrent Paget¡¦s disease of the vulva. ObstetGynecol 2003;102:1163¡V6.76. Piovano E, Ferrero A, Ravarino N, Martra F,Modaffari P, Zola P. Syringoid eccrine carcinoma: case report of a rare tumor occasionallydetected in the vulva. Gynecol Oncol Case Rep2011;1:17¡V9.77. Schimp VL, Worley C, Brunello S, et al.Vacuum-assisted closure in the treatment ofgynecologic oncology wound failures. GynecolOncol 2004;92:586¡V91.78. Riebe E, Ohlinger R, Thele F, K?hler G.Polypropylene mesh implantation in combination with vacuum-assisted closure in the management of metastatic or locally recurrent vulvarcancer: case report and review of literature. Int JGynecol Cancer 2010;20:179¡V83.79. Dainty LA, Bosco JJ, McBroom JW,Winter WE 3rd, Rose GS, Elkas JC. Noveltechniques to improve split-thickness skin graftviability during vulvo-vaginal reconstruction.Gynecol Oncol 2005;97:949¡V52.80. Narducci F, Samouelian V, Marchaudon V,et al. Vacuum-assisted closure therapy in themanagement of patients undergoing vulvectomy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol2012;161:199¡V201.81. Tauber R, Schmid S, Horn T, et al. Inguinallymph node dissection: epidermal vacuumtherapy for prevention of wound complications.J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg 2013;66:390¡V6.82. Stanirowski PJ, Wnuk A, Cendrowski K,Sawicki W. Growth factors, silver dressings andnegative pressure wound therapy in the management of hard-to-heal postoperative woundsin obstetrics and gynecology: a review. ArchGynecol Obstet 2015;292:757¡V75.83. Altman AD, Nelson G, Nation J, Chu P,Ghatage P. Vacuum assisted wound closures ingynaecologic surgery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can2011;33:1031¡V7.84. Denzinger S, L?bke L, Roessler W,Wieland WF, Kessler S, Burger M. Vacuumassisted closure versus conventional woundcare in the treatment of wound failures followinginguinal lymphadenectomy for penile cancer: aretrospective study. Eur Urol 2007;51:1320¡V5.85. Spiess PE, Hernandez MS, Pettaway CA.Contemporary inguinal lymph node dissection:minimizing complications. World J Urol 2009;27:205¡V12.86. Walker KF, Day H, Abu J, Nunns D,Williamson K, Duncan T. Do surgical techniquesused in groin lymphadenectomy for vulval cancer affect morbidity rates? Int J Gynecol Cancer2011;21:1495¡V9.87. Dardarian TS, Gray HJ, Morgan MA,Rubin SC, Randall TC. Saphenous vein sparingduring inguinal lymphadenectomy to reducemorbidity in patients with vulvar carcinoma.Gynecol Oncol 2006;101:140¡V2.88. Gould N, Kamelle S, Tillmanns T, et al.Predictors of complications after inguinallymphadenectomy. Gynecol Oncol 2001;82:329¡V32.89. Reedy MB, Capen CV, Baker DP,Petersen WG, Kuehl TJ. Hyperbaric oxygentherapy following radical vulvectomy: anadjunctive therapy to improve wound healing.Gynecol Oncol 1994;53:13¡V6.90. Gaarenstroom KN, Kenter GG, Trimbos JB,et al. Postoperative complications after vulvectomy and inguinofemoral lymphadenectomyusing separate groin incisions. Int J GynecolCancer 2003;13:522¡V7.91. Hinten F, van den Einden LC, Hendriks JC,et al. Risk factors for short- and long-termcomplications after groin surgery in vulvar cancer. Br J Cancer 2011;105:1279¡V87.92. Mortenson MM, Xing Y, Weaver S, et al.Fibrin sealant does not decrease seroma outputor time to drain removal following inguinofemoral lymph node dissection in melanomapatients: a randomized controlled trial(NCT00506311). World J Surg Oncol 2008;6:63.93. Bouchot O, Rigaud J, Maillet F, Hetet JF,Karam G. Morbidity of inguinal lymphadenectomy for invasive penile carcinoma. Eur Urol2004;45:761¡V5; discussion 765e6.94. Buda A, Ghelardi A, Fruscio R, et al. Thecontribution of a collagen-fibrin patch (Tachosil)to prevent the postoperative lymphatic complications after groin lymphadenectomy: a doubleinstitution observational study. Eur J ObstetGynecol Reprod Biol 2016;197:156¡V8.95. Tranoulis A, Laios A, Theophilou G,Bramis K, Kehoe S. The impact of saphenousvein sparing during inguinal lymphadenectomyon postoperative morbidity in women with vulvalcancer: an updated per-groin meta-analysis ofshort-term outcomes. Int J Gynecol Cancer2018;28:1232¡V8.96. Pontre J, Harding J, Chivers P, et al. Dogroin drains reduce postoperative morbidity inwomen undergoing inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer? Int J Gynecol Cancer2018;28:183¡V7.97. Uyl-De Groot CA, Hartog JG, Derksen JG,et al. Cost-effectiveness and quality of life ofgranulocyte-colony stimulating factor (filgrastim)after radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy: results of a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Obstet GynecolReprod Biol 2004;114:77¡V82.98. Morelli M, Rocca ML, Venturella R, et al.Adjuvant use of platelet gel for wound breakdown prevention in advanced vulvar cancersurgery: a retrospective study. Int J GynecolCancer 2013;23:1490¡V4.99. Wills A, Obermair A. A review of complications associated with the surgical treatment ofvulvar cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2013;131:467¡V79.ajog.org Special ReportOCTOBER 2020 American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 485