           Clinical Review & Education

          JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery | Review
          Optimal Perioperative Care in Major Head and Neck Cancer
          Surgery With Free Flap Reconstruction
          A Consensus Review and Recommendations
          From the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society

          Joseph C. Dort, MD, MSc; D. Gregory Farwell, MD; Merran Findlay, AdvAPD, MS; Gerhard F. Huber, MD;
          Paul Kerr, MD; Melissa A. Shea-Budgell, MSc; Christian Simon, MD; Jeffrey Uppington, MD;
          David Zygun, MD, MSc; Olle Ljungqvist, MD, PhD; Jeffrey Harris, MD, MHA


                                                                                                  Invited Commentary
            IMPORTANCE  Head and neck cancers often require complex, labor-intensive surgeries,   page 303
            especially when free flap reconstruction is required. Enhanced recovery is important in this Supplemental content at
            patient population but evidence-based protocols on perioperative care for this population jamaotolaryngology.com
            are lacking.

            OBJECTIVE To provide a consensus-based protocol for optimal perioperative care of patients
            undergoing head and neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction.

            EVIDENCE REVIEW Following endorsement by the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS)
            Society to develop this protocol, a systematic review was conducted for each topic. The PubMed
            and Cochrane databases were initially searched to identify relevant publications on head and neck
            cancer surgery from 1965 through April 2015. Consistent key words for each topic included
            “head and neck surgery,”“pharyngectomy,”“laryngectomy,”“laryngopharyngectomy,”“neck
            dissection,”“parotidlymphadenectomy,”“thyroidectomy,”“oralcavityresection,”“glossectomy,”and
            “head and neck.”The final selection of literature included meta-analyses and systematic reviews
            as well as randomized controlled trials where available. In the absence of high-level data, case
            seriesandnonrandomizedstudiesinheadandneckcancersurgerypatientsorrandomizedcontrolled
            trials and systematic reviews in non–head and neck cancer surgery patients, were considered.
            An international panel of experts in major head and neck cancer surgery and enhanced recovery
            after surgery reviewed and assessed the literature for quality and developed recommendations for
            each topic based on the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
            (GRADE) system. All recommendations were graded following a consensus discussion among the
            expert panel.

            FINDINGS The literature search, including a hand search of reference lists, identified 215
            relevant publications that were considered to be the best evidence for the topic areas. A total
            of 17 topic areas were identified for inclusion in the protocol for the perioperative care of
            patients undergoing major head and neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction. Best
            practice includes several elements of perioperative care. Among these elements are the
            provision of preoperative carbohydrate treatment, pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis,
            perioperative antibiotics in clean-contaminated procedures, corticosteroid and antiemetic
            medications, short acting anxiolytics, goal-directed fluid management, opioid-sparing
            multimodal analgesia, frequent flap monitoring, early mobilization, and the avoidance of
            preoperative fasting.
                                                                                               Author Affiliations: Author
                                                                                               affiliations are listed at the end of this
            CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE  The evidence base for specific perioperative care elements in article.
            head and neck cancer surgery is variable and in many cases information from different Corresponding Author: Joseph C.
            surgerical procedures form the basis for these recommendations. Clinical evaluation of these Dort, MD, MSc, Section of
            recommendations is a logical next step and further research in this patient population Otolaryngology, Department of
            is warranted.                                                                      Surgery, Cumming School of
                                                                                               Medicine, University of Calgary,
                                                                                               3280 Hospital Dr, NW
            JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;143(3):292-303. doi:10.1001/jamaoto.2016.2981 Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada
            Published online October 13, 2016.                                                 (jdort@ucalgary.ca).

   292                                                                                        (Reprinted) jamaotolaryngology.com

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


            Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                   Review Clinical Review & Education

                      alignant abnormalities of the head and neck often re-
                      quire complex, labor intensive surgery such as compos- Key Points
                      ite oral cavity resections, skull base surgeries, or large
            M                                                           Question What is optimal perioperative care, as defined by an
            pharyngectomy and/or laryngectomy resections, often in the set- enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) approach, for patients
            ting of salvage surgery after failed attempts at radiation and che- undergoing head and neck cancer surgery with free flap
            motherapy. Free flap reconstruction is often required for extensive reconstruction?

            defects, thereby adding to the length and complexity of these pro- Findings In this systematic review, best practice includes several
            cedures. These extended procedures require a coordinated multi- elements of perioperative care. Among these elements are the
            disciplinary team to deliver care before, during, and after surgery. provision of preoperative carbohydrate treatment, pharmacologic
            Optimal perioperative patient care is of the utmost importance to thromboprophylaxis, perioperative antibiotics in clean-contaminated
            ensure that the recovery period is efficiently and effectively man- procedures, corticosteroid and antiemetic medications, short acting
            aged in an effort to provide the best possible outcome for the pa- anxiolytics,goal-directedfluidmanagement,opioid-sparingmultimodal
                                                                        analgesia, frequent flap monitoring, early mobilization, and the
            tient. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) was introduced as
                                                                        avoidance of preoperative fasting.
            a way of optimizing perioperative care for a variety of surgical pro-
            cedures. Initially ERAS recommendations were developed for pa- Meaning Recovery following surgery for head and neck cancer
            tients undergoing colorectal surgery1; evaluation of these recom- with free flap reconstruction can be enhanced through the use of
                                                                        evidence-based elements of perioperative care.
            mendationshasshownthatpatientsinwhomtheERASinterventions
            are applied experience significant improvements in function after
            surgery.2 In turn, when the ERAS guidelines are implemented pa- through April 2015. Consistent key words for each topic included
            tients have demonstrated reduced morbidity and shorter length of “head and neck surgery,”“pharyngectomy,”“laryngectomy,”“laryn-
            hospital stay.2 The ERAS protocols have revolutionized the way peri- gopharyngectomy,” “neck dissection,” “parotid lymphadenec-
            operative care is provided and measured.                 tomy,” “thyroidectomy,” “oral cavity resection,” “glossectomy,” and
               An ERAS protocol for head and neck cancer surgery with free “head and neck.” Additional key words were added to the search
            flap reconstruction has not been published previously. Therefore, strategy,as appropriate, based on the particular topic. Reference lists
            an international expert panel of head and neck clinicians (surgery, ofalleligiblearticleswerehand-searchedforadditionalrelevantstud-
            anesthesiology, critical care, and nutrition), working collabora- ies. Conference proceedings were not included in the search.
            tivelywiththeERASSociety(http://www.erassociety.org),developed The resulting list of abstracts was initially screened to identify
            a consensus-based ERAS protocol for the perioperative treatment potentially relevant articles for each topic. Each section author re-
            of patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery with free flap viewed the resulting literature and search strategies were ex-
            reconstruction.Thebestavailableevidenceforeachinterventionwas panded or refined, as appropriate. The final selection of literature
            considered when developing the recommendations. Evidence levels included meta-analyses and systematic reviews as well as random-
            and recommendation grades are provided for all interventions. The ized controlled trials wherever possible. In the absence of high-
            purpose of this protocol is to improve patient well-being in the level data, case series and nonrandomized studies in head and neck
            postoperative period by reducing procedure-related morbidity and cancer surgery patients or randomized controlled trials and system-
            complications. Evidence from previous ERAS protocols suggest that atic reviews in non-head and neck cancer surgery patients, were con-
            implementation of this protocol will also improve efficiency of care, sidered. Section authors thoroughly reviewed this literature to form
            with improvements in overall resource use and cost of care. the basis for the recommendations. Any discrepancies in the inter-
                                                                     pretation of the literature were discussed and resolved during
                                                                     monthly conference calls with panel members.
            Methods
                                                                     Quality Assessment and Data Analyses
            Development of Consensus Recommendations                 Criteria developed by the Centre for Evidence Based Medicine
            In February 2015, an international panel of content experts in major (Oxford, England)3 were used to assess the overall quality of the evi-
            head and neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction, repre- dence. Possible levels of evidence included “high” (ie, systematic re-
            senting the nations of Australia, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland, and views, meta-analyses, or robust randomized controlled trials), “mod-
            theUnitedStates,wasassembled.FollowingareviewofexistingERAS erate” (ie, smaller randomized controlled trials or prospective cohort
            Society guidelines, the panel was consulted for appropriate items to data), or “low” (ie, retrospective data). The Grading of Recommenda-
            include in the protocol. Final decisions were made by the lead tions,Assessment,DevelopmentandEvaluation(GRADE)system4was
            authors (J.D. and J.H.) and approved by the ERAS Society in March used to assign a level of strength to each recommendation. Briefly,
            2015. Items were assigned to individual authors, based on areas of ex- “strong”recommendationswerebasedonhigh-qualityevidencealone
            pertise and interest. A researcher (M.S.B.) with expertise in oncol- or on weaker quality evidence where there is a high likelihood of ben-
            ogy systematic reviews and cancer recommendation development efitandlowriskofharm;“weak”recommendationswerebasedonlow-
            provided content expertise, methodological support, and coordina- quality evidence alone or on higher quality evidence where the likeli-
            tion.ThepanelmetmonthlyfromMay2015throughNovember2015.   hood of benefit is uncertain; “conditional” recommendations were
                                                                     based on low-quality evidence where the desirable effects probably
            Literature Search and Study Selection                    outweigh the undesirable effects. Any conflicts in the assigned
            The PubMed and Cochrane databases were initially searched to iden- strengthsofevidenceandgradingofrecommendationstatementswere
            tify relevant publications on head and neck cancer surgery from 1965 resolved through discussions with all authors during panel meetings.

            jamaotolaryngology.com                     (Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 293

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


          Clinical Review & Education Review                                         Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery

                                                                   Preoperative Nutritional Status
          Results                                                  Malnutrition is prevalent in patients with head and neck cancer, is in-
                                                                   fluenced by multiple factors, and is associated with adverse clinical,
          A total of 17 topic areas, spanning preoperative, intraoperative, and cost, and patient-centered outcomes. Mechanical obstruction aris-
          postoperative care, were identified for inclusion in the protocol. The ing from tumor location contributes to progressive and/or pro-
          literature search, including a hand search of reference lists, identi- longed dysphagia, predisposing patients to detrimental sequelae of
          fied 215 relevant publications that were considered to be the best evi- malnutrition and subsequently greater susceptibility to postopera-
          dence for the topic areas. Presented in the Table are the recommen- tive complications, such as compromised wound healing, increased
          dations for each of the 17 ERAS items, along with the level of evidence risk of infection, increased length of stay, and risk of refeeding syn-
          that was used to inform each recommendation and the strength drome. Existing guidelines suggest preoperative nutrition interven-
          (grade) of each recommendation. The evidence base is described in tioninmalnourishedpatientsmayleadtoimprovedoutcomesthrough
          thediscussionwithadditionalreferencesincludedasanonlinesupple- a reduction in malnutrition-related adverse events.10,11 Patients with
          ment (eg, see Additional References in the Supplement).  ahighriskofdysphagiaandrefeedingsyndromemayneedanadapted
                                                                   nutrition plan. Nutrition assessment tools validated for use in the on-
                                                                   cology population should be considered standard practice in mod-
          Discussion                                               ern surgical care with comprehensive evaluation of anthropometry,
                                                                   biochemistry, dietary intake, and clinical examination of body com-
          Preadmission Education                                   position in conjunction with medical and social histories.12
          Preparing patients and families for surgery is believed to be a worth-
          while endeavor. Preoperative education is thought to be an impor- Nutritional Formulae
          tant step in the surgical journey, particularly when major surgery is Immunonutrition has been explored in the surgical setting. Potential
          planned. Despite these widely held beliefs, there is limited evi- benefits of oral or enteral formulae enriched with nutrients purported
          dence demonstrating the beneficial effects of preoperative educa- tohaveanimmunemodulatingeffect,typicallyarginine,glutamine,ω-3
          tion on patient outcomes. Evidence from the pediatric literature sug- fattyacids,orribonucleicacids,havebeeninvestigated.Systematicre-
          gests preoperative counseling, regardless of how it is provided, is a viewssuggestanassociationbetweenreducedlengthofstayandpost-
          useful educational intervention and that the shorter the time be- operativeadministrationofimmunonutritionsupport13,14;however,the
          tween counseling and the procedure, the greater the retention of mechanismisnotfullyunderstood.Preoperativeimmunonutritiondoes
          information.5 A randomized study in patients undergoing paroti- not seem to have any additional benefits in comparison with standard
          dectomy and thyroidectomy found that a preoperative educa- nutritionsupportinpatientsundergoingheadandneckcancersurgery.
          tional intervention improved recall of operative risks.6 Investigationsofimmunonutritionadministeredintheperioperativepe-
             Preoperative education is probably a useful intervention be- riod have produced mixed results in the head and neck cancer popu-
          cause the psychosocial aspects of undergoing major head and neck lation,largelyarisingfromvariationsinstudydesign,nutritionalformula
          cancer surgery are believed to have an important impact on clinical administrationprotocols,anddefinitionsofperioperativeperiodmake
          outcomes. However, the details of the timing and nature of such edu- drawingdefinitiveconclusionschallenging.11 Despitethepossibleben-
          cation has not been well described; there are no high quality studies efitsofimmunonutrition,particularlyinthepostoperativesetting,fur-
          specifically focused on the impact of preoperative education on clini- ther investigation through well-designed clinical studies is warranted.
          cal outcomes in patients undergoing major head and neck cancer sur-
          gery.A small 2015 study7 concluded that head and neck patients who Preoperative Fasting and Preoperative Treatment
          hadapreoperativesocialworkervisitfeltbetterpreparedfortheirsur- With Carbohydrates
          gical procedure and its aftermath. A 2002 descriptive study8 looked Fasting from midnight prior to surgery originates from historical, in-
          at care pathway development in patients undergoing major head and stitutional, and clinician-driven practices. Despite evidence of poorer
          neck cancer surgery and anecdotally reported beneficial effects from outcomes and delayed recovery with prolonged fasting, outdated
          a patient education brochure. We recommend that further research surgical fasting practices persist.15
          be conducted in this important area.                        In enhanced recovery protocols for other patient groups, the ra-
                                                                   tionale for preoperative carbohydrate (CHO) loading arises from the
          Perioperative Nutritional Care                           hypothesis that ingestion of CHO-rich fluids attenuates both insulin
          Enhanced recovery after surgery protocols routinely include ele- resistance and catabolism, promoting better glucose control and lean
          ments of perioperative nutritional care, such as reduced fasting time, tissuepreservation.16 Highqualitystudiesevaluatingthepotentialben-
          avoidance of dehydration, and carbohydrate loading preopera- efits of preoperative CHO treatment are limited, particularly in pa-
          tively followed by early progression to oral feeding postopera- tients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery.Systematic reviews
          tively, however, evidence specific to enhanced recovery practices and meta-analyses consistently confirm that although preoperative
          in relation to nutritional care of patients with head and neck cancer CHO loading appears to be safe, published trial quality has been poor
          is limited.9 Where deemed safe, and while taking into account the and larger, more rigorous randomized clinical trials (RCTs) are
          considerations unique to this patient group, perioperative nutri- required.17,18 A recent systematic review19 of preoperative CHO treat-
          tion care recommendations may be extrapolated from existing en- mentafterelectivesurgeryevaluating1976participantsacross27RCTs
          hanced recovery protocols in other cancer surgical populations1,10 found that, although the intervention was associated with a 1.5-day
          and draw on existing comprehensive evidence-based guidelines for reduction in length of hospital stay in major abdominal surgery,there
          nutritional care of adult patients with head and neck cancer.11 wasnodifferenceinpostoperativecomplicationrates.Thereviewalso

   294    JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 (Reprinted)           jamaotolaryngology.com

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                                                      Review   Clinical Review & Education


                 Table. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Recommendations for Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery With Free Flap Reconstruction

                  Item                       Recommendation                                                                              Evidence        Recommendation
                  Preadmission               All patients undergoing major head and neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction    Low             Strong
                  education                  should receive structured teaching from a qualified health practitioner.
                  Perioperative              All patients undergoing major surgery for head and neck cancer should undergo preoperative  High            Strong
                  nutritional care           comprehensive nutritional assessment, with a special focus on dysphagia and risk for refeeding
                                             syndrome. Preoperative nutrition intervention is recommended for those identified as
                                             malnourished.
                                             A standard polymeric enteral nutrition formula should be considered suitable for use in     Low             Weak
                                             patients requiring preoperative nutrition support.
                                             A standard polymeric enteral nutrition formula should be considered suitable for use in     Moderate        Conditional
                                             patients requiring postoperative nutrition support. There are insufficient data to provide
                                             a recommendation on the use of immunonutrition
                                             Preoperative fasting should be minimized. In patients suitable for oral intake and with     High (fluids),  Strong (fluids),
                                             appropriate screening and management for those presenting with dysphagia or risk of         low (solids),   strong (solids),
                                             refeeding syndrome, clear fluids should be permitted for up to 2 hours and solids for up to low (CHO)       conditional (CHO)
                                             6 hours prior to anesthesia. Preoperative CHO treatment may be offered to head and neck
                                             cancer patients.
                                              Oral diet is the first choice for all patients tolerating it. In patients for whom oral feeding Moderate   Strong
                                              cannot be established postoperative tube feeding should be initiated within 24 hours.
                                              Nutrition interventions should be developed in consultation with the multidisciplinary team
                                              and individualized according to nutritional status and surgical procedure.
                  Prophylaxis against        Patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction are at       High            Strong
                  thromboembolism            increased risk of VTE and should undergo pharmacologic prophylaxis; however, the risk
                                             of bleeding must be weighed against the benefits on an individualized basis.
                  Antibiotic prophylaxis     Perioperative antibiotics are not indicated for short clean head and neck oncologic procedures. High        Strong
                                             In clean-contaminated procedures, perioperative antibiotics should be given 1 hour prior to
                                             surgery and continued for 24 hours.
                  Postoperative nausea       Patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery should receive preoperative and            High            Strong
                  and/or vomiting            intraoperative medications to mitigate Postoperative nausea and/or vomiting. A combination
                  prophylaxis                of corticosteroid and antiemetic should be considered.
                  Preanesthetic              Patients should receive short acting anxiolytics, given intravenously and titrated to required High         Strong
                  medications                effect. Long acting anxiolytics and opioids should be avoided.
                  Standard anesthetic        The anesthetic protocol should not only prevent awareness, but also minimize adverse effects Low            Strong
                  protocol                   and allow patients to awaken and recover rapidly; therefore, avoidance of too deep anesthesia,
                                             especially in elderly patients, is recommended.
                  Preventing                 Normothermia should be maintained intraoperatively. Temperature monitoring is necessary     High            Strong
                  hypothermia                to ensure normothermia is maintained.
                  Perioperative fluid        Fluids should be managed in a goal-directed manner, avoiding over and under hydration.      Moderate        Strong
                  management
                  Routine postoperative      Routine intensive care unit admission to facilitate an immediate postoperative period of deep Low           Weak
                  intensive care             sedation and artificial respiration is not necessary. A subset of low-risk uncomplicated patients
                  admission                  may be treated safely after recovery from anesthesia in a high dependency unit or specialist
                                             ward, provided adequate skilled nursing and medical coverage is provided.
                  Pain management            Opioid-sparing, multimodal analgesia, utilizing NSAIDs, COX inhibitors, and paracetamol, are High           Strong
                                             preferred for patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery. Patient-controlled analgesia
                                             can be considered if multimodal analgesia approaches are insufficient. No recommendation
                                             can be made on the role of additional nerve blocks.
                  Postoperative flap         Free flap monitoring should be performed at least hourly for the first 24 hours postoperatively. Moderate   Strong
                  monitoring                 Monitoring should be continued for the duration of the patient’s stay with tapering of intensity
                                             after the first 24 hours. Method of monitoring should include, at a minimum, clinical
                                             examination by staff experienced with free flap monitoring. Adjunct monitoring techniques
                                             should be considered.
                  Postoperative              Early mobilization, within the first 24 hours of surgery is recommended for patients        Moderate        Strong
                  mobilization               undergoing major head and neck cancer surgery.
                  Postoperative              Vacuum assisted closure is recommended for complex cervical wounds.                         High            Strong
                  wound care                 Vacuum assisted closure may be considered for free flap donor site.                         Moderate        Strong
                                             Polyurethane film or hydrocolloid dressings should be used for skin graft donor site treatment. High        Strong
                  Urinary catheterization    Urinary catheters should be removed as soon as the patient is able to void, ideally less than High          Strong
                                             24 hours after completion of surgery.
                  Tracheostomy care          Decannulation after tracheostomy and stoma closure is recommended.                          High            Strong
                                             Surgical closure of the tracheostomy site is recommended.                                   Moderate        Strong
                  Postoperative pulmonary    Pulmonary physical therapy should be initiated as early as possible after head and neck     High            Strong
                  physical therapy           reconstructions to avoid pulmonary complications.

                 Abbreviations: CHO, carbohydrate; COX, cyclooxygenase; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; VTE, venous thromboembolism.

                 highlighted a lack of adequate blinding resulting in biases that may            Early Postoperative Diet
                 haveinfluencedtheobservedtreatmenteffects.Assuch,recommen-                      and Artificial Nutrition
                 dations for routine use of preoperative CHO treatment in patients un-           There is large variation in the degree of functional deficit antici-
                 dergoing head and neck cancer surgery require extrapolation from                pated following surgery for head and neck cancer, depending on the
                 otherpatientgroups.Thedataonpatientswithdiabetesarestillsparse                  extent of surgical resection and reconstruction that may be re-
                 but available information suggests that gastric emptying is similar to          quired. Hence, some patients may be able to resume oral intake with
                 controls in well controlled diabetics.20   Well-designed trials should be       relatively little impact on nutrition, while for others, nil by mouth with
                 considered to reduce this evidence-gap.                                         enteral nutrition support is indicated.

                 jamaotolaryngology.com                                       (Reprinted)   JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery       March 2017   Volume 143, Number 3       295

                                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


          Clinical Review & Education Review                                         Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery

             The literature examining the early introduction of postopera- some animal studies demonstrate the efficacy of antithrombotic
          tive oral diet is limited to the post primary total laryngectomy co- agents, human studies have failed to confirm these findings.
          hort and is controversial. An RCT21 of early vs delayed oral feeding
          in this subgroup found no significant difference in length of stay or Antibiotic Prophylaxis
          fistula rates. A systematic review22 including 4 RCTs examined the Clean head and neck oncologic cases have a low baseline periopera-
          safety of initiating early oral feeding in 180 patients and found no tive wound infection rate and do not benefit from prophylactic
          increase in pharyngocutaneous fistula rates in those patients who antibiotics.33 However, clean contaminated head and neck onco-
          received early oral feeding following total laryngectomy. However, logic cases have an unacceptably high rate (ie, up to 80%) of peri-
          given the limited number of publications, care should be taken in its operative wound infections.34 Perioperative antibiotics, given 1 to 2
          application and patient suitability should be evaluated on an indi- hours prior to surgery and continued for 24 hours have consistently
          vidual basis. Consultation with the surgical team, dietitian, and demonstrated a significant reduction in wound infections in random-
          speech pathologist regarding optimal timing of the reintroduction izedcontrolledtrials.35 Longercoursesofantibioticsof3to5dayshave
          of oral intake is advised.                               not shown benefit over 24 hours in either wound infection rates or
             Postoperative enteral nutrition support in the form of nasoen- pneumonia rates.36 These findings have held in most series looking
          terictubefeedingiscommonlyrequiredforthosepatientsundergoing at larger cases requiring pedicle or free flap reconstruction.37
          major ablative and reconstructive surgery of the upper aerodigestive Theuseoftopicaldecontaminationoftheupperaerodigestivetract
          tract. In cases where adjuvant therapies are planned, insertion of a with mupirocin and 0.2% chlorhexidine has been shown to reduce
          feeding gastrostomy tube may need to be considered at the point of pneumoniaratesandnosocomialinfectionsinpatientsintheintensive
          diagnosis when prolonged nutrition support is anticipated.23 Few careunit(ICU).38 Studies39 specifictoheadandneckoncologypatients
          studies have explored timing to initiation of postoperative tube feed- havenotdemonstratedsignificantdifferencesinwoundinfectionrates
          ing specifically in patients with head and neck cancer; however, ex- with topical decontamination. However, a recent study40 demon-
          isting guidance can be used to guide routine clinical practice.11 strated a trend toward fewer and less severe infections.
             Parenteral nutrition (PN) support is indicated in the absence of
          normal gut function and when enteral access is not possible. In rare Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting Prophylaxis
          instanceswhenPNiscommencedinpatientswithheadandneckcan-  Especially after free flap reconstructions, vomiting can have detri-
          cer, published guidelines on PN following surgery may be used to mental effects on outcomes by causing suture dehiscence, wound in-
          guide practice.24                                        fection, fistula, and consecutive flap loss.41 Postoperative nausea and
                                                                   vomiting(PONV)canalsoimpairearlymobilization.Postoperativenau-
          Prophylaxis Against Thromboembolism                      sea and vomiting prophylaxis should be considered for all patients
          Both cancer and surgery are individual risk factors for venous throm- undergoing head and neck cancer surgery, because they are at mod-
          boembolism (VTE); however, patients with both factors are at high erate to high risk.42 A combination of 5-hydroxytryptamine-3
          risk.25 The rates of deep vein thrombosis and fatal pulmonary embo- (5-HT3) receptor agonists and corticosteroids has been proven
          lism range from 15% to 30% and 0.2% to 0.9%, respectively,in gen- efficacious.43 When rescue therapy is required, the antiemetic should
          eral surgery patients without prophylaxis; however, advanced age be chosen from a different therapeutic class than the drugs used for
          (>40 years) and the presence of cancer increases these rates to 40 prophylaxis.44 A newer class of antiemetics, NK1 receptor agonists,
          to 80% and 0.2% to 5%, respectively.26 Controlled trials27,28 provide havedemonstratedequivalentcontrolofPONVcomparedwith5-HT3
          compelling evidence for the use of perioperative VTE prophylaxis in agonists.45 Randomized clinical trial data on the incidence of PONV
          properly selected surgical patients. Validated scoring systems to de- in association with propofol or sevoflurane strongly favor the use of
          terminetheneedforandnatureofVTEprophylaxisconsistentlyplace these agents for maintenance of anesthesia.46
          patients undergoing major head and neck resections with free flap
          reconstruction at moderate to high risk for VTE.29 Readers are cau- Preanesthetic Medications
          tioned against heeding contrary recommendations from smaller ret- Not all patients experience preoperative anxiety, but some data sug-
          rospective studies in the otolaryngology–head and neck cancer sur- gest an incidence rate as high as 80%.47 Anxiety can be relieved by
          gery literature that suggest that this population may be at lower risk nonpharmacological means, including a preoperative visit by an
          than expected, as retrospective studies are well known for underes- anesthesiologist,48 preoperative music chosen by the patient,49 or a
          timating the incidence of deep vein thrombosis.          CHO drink.50 Medications, such as benzodiazepines, can be effec-
             There is a demonstrable reduction in VTE when pharmacologic tive in reducing anxiety and do not increase discharge time in outpa-
          prophylaxis (ie, low-molecular-weight heparin) is used in patients un- tients,thoughsomepatientsmayhaveshort-termimpairmentofpsy-
          dergoingheadandneckcancersurgerywithfreeflapreconstruction.30 chomotor function.51 Alternatively,comparable anxiolytic effects can
          However, there is also a demonstrable increase in bleeding compli- be achieved with nonbenzodiazapines, such as dexmedetomidine.52
          cations if VTE prophylaxis includes anticoagulants.31 Therefore, the
          useofanticoagulantsinpatientsundergoingmajorheadandneckcan- Standard Anesthetic Protocol
          cersurgerywithfreeflapreconstructionmustbeindividualizedbased The airway of all patients undergoing head and neck cancer sur-
          on both the risk of VTE and the risk of bleeding. Combined use of an- gery should be carefully examined preoperatively with particular at-
          tiplatelet agents and anticoagulant VTE prophylaxis may increase the tention being paid to airway assessment, since previous irradiation
          risk of bleeding above the risk of VTE events.           can lead to lymphedema and fibrosis, causing difficulties with
             There are no pharmacologic measures that have been proven to intubation.53 In addition, any tumor, especially an obstructing one,
          reduce free flap anastomotic thrombosis or flap necrosis.32 Although may be challenging and require the use of special airway devices such

   296    JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 (Reprinted)           jamaotolaryngology.com

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


            Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                   Review Clinical Review & Education

            as a Glidescope or fiberoptic intubation.54 Fiberoptic assessment of balance, where the aim is to maintain the preoperative weight in the
            the airway preoperatively can provide useful information.55 immediate perioperative period, or goal directed fluid therapy.78 The
               There is no literature indicating that a specific standard anes- latter is based on determining whether a patient is fluid responsive, as
            thetic protocol or drugs for patients undergoing head and neck can- measured by cardiac output, stroke volume, or pulse pressure
            cer surgery should be employed. Therefore, the general recommen- variation.79,80 The aim is to push the patient’s blood toward the peak
            dations on anesthesia practice from the ERAS Society have been of the Frank Starling curve81 and maximize cardiac output and oxygen
            elected to serve as guidance.56                          delivery,82 which can be measured invasively with an arterial line,
                                                                     semiinvasively using a Doppler, or noninvasively using bioreactance
            Preventing Intraoperative Hypothermia                    technology. Zero-balance and goal directed therapy have similar
            Hypothermia, defined here as a core temperature less than 36°C, is outcomes.83 The use of central venous monitoring in major head and
            associated with a number of perioperative complications.57 In gen- neck cancer surgery is not useful.84
            eral, these include morbid cardiac events, bleeding, and wound Blood transfusion in head and neck free flap patients does not
            infection.58 Hypothermia is associated with increased morbidity, affect flap survival, but is associated with increased perioperative
            increased length of stay, and increase in cost.59 More recently in- complications.85 Significantly increased wound infection rates and
            creased complications in hypothermic patients have been shown in death were shown in a retrospective study86 of blood transfusion
            those having surgery for head and neck cancer.60 Intraoperative controlled for age, preoperative hemoglobin and albumin, cancer
            hypothermia can also pose considerable risk of free flap infection stage, and adverse pathologic features. These recent studies sup-
            with no benefits to anastomotic patency.61 Hypothermia in the re- port consideration of a restrictive transfusion policy in free flap
            covery room can lead to shivering, which can increase wound pain patients.87 Nevertheless, recent data have suggested that a liberal
            and the metabolic rate (and associated heat production), owing to transfusion strategy may improve outcomes perioperatively in
            increased oxygen consumption.62,63 Compliance with a surgical care adult cardiac surgery patients.88 The trigger for transfusion
            improvement project for body temperature management (SCIP remains a moving target. A transfusion trigger of 7 g/dL has been
            Inf-10) is associated with improved clinical outcomes, specifically a suggested for routine patients with adaptation for patients with
            reduced incidence of hospital-acquired infection, ischemic cardio- asymptomatic coronary disease (8 g/dL) and patient with ongoing
            vascular events, mortality and reduced length of stay.64 ischemia (10 g/dL).89
               Avoiding hypothermia at any stage in the perioperative process
            is therefore important. Warming patients preoperatively with a warm Routine Postoperative Intensive Care Admission
            aircoverhasbeenshowntoincreasecoretemperatureandthusreduce There are no prospective randomized trials investigating the use-
            intraoperative hypothermia.65 Intraoperatively it is important to con- fulness of routine ICU treatment following head and neck cancer sur-
            tinuouslymeasurecentraltemperature.Thesiteofsurgerymywellpre- gery. However, a growing body of literature, including retrospec-
            cludetheusualmonitoringsitesofthenasopharynx,esophagus,ortym- tivestudiesexaminingthepracticeofroutineICUadmissionfollowing
            panic membrane. The urinary bladder thermistor catheter has been major head and neck cancer surgery, suggest that ICU admission
            shown to correlate well with pulmonary artery thermistors66 and can could be avoided. An immediate postoperative period of deep se-
            be used if necessary.Maintaining normothermia intraoperatively can dation and artificial ventilation in an ICU has been associated with
            be achieved by forced air warming, circulating water garment, under- prolonged time to weaning from mechanical ventilation and an in-
            body electrical mattress,67 or resistive heating blankets.68 Insulating crease in the frequency of respiratory insufficiency and pneumo-
            blanketsalonemaynotbesufficienttopreventhypothermia.69 Warm- nia, as compared with allowing patients to breathe spontaneously
            ing intravenous fluids keeps patients warmer with less shivering than without sedation in a recovery room; furthermore, there was no dif-
            fluids at room temperature, though it was not shown that warming ference in the number of flaps lost or ICU readmissions.90 Other
            wash out fluids made a significant difference.70         studies91,92 in patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery
                                                                     have demonstrated no difference in general morbidity between pa-
            Perioperative Intravenous Fluid Management               tients cared for in an ICU and those cared for in a specialist ward, sug-
            The use of vasoconstrictors for the management of hypotension in gesting that it is possible to nurse these patients outside of the ICU
            free flap surgery is controversial. Animal studies have shown that environment, provided there is close medical support and an ap-
            their use can lead to vasoconstriction in the flap microcirculation71; propriately trained nurse allocated to care for these patients.
            yet, intraoperative use of vasoconstrictors has not been shown to A retrospective analysis93 revealed low use rates of critical care
            affect flap outcomes in head and neck cancer surgery72 or other mi- services by patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery and
            crosurgical procedures.73 An alternative to vasoconstrictors is cer- did not identify any causes of complications leading to use of criti-
            tain inotropes, such as dobutamine, which has been shown to im- cal care services. Risk factors for complications include bilateral neck
            provemeanandmaximumbloodflowsthrougharterialanastomoses  dissection, an APACHE II score greater than 10, massive blood trans-
            in head and neck cancer surgery.74                       fusion, early postoperative complications requiring further opera-
               Intraoperative fluid management has been studied mainly in pa- tion under general anesthesia, smoking history, and perioperative
            tientsundergoingintraabdominalsurgery.Theavailableheadandneck antibiotic choice.94 In absence of these factors, there are no data
            literature indicates that in patients undergoing head and neck cancer to support the use of routine ICU care. Funding issues, ICU work load,
            surgery large amounts of intraoperative fluids are associated with in- standing costs (in the ICU and elsewhere), and the availability of skills
            creased complications.75 However, fluid under resuscitation may put and resources outside of the ICU must be considered in the deter-
            patients at risk for postoperative flap thrombosis.76 An optimum fluid mination of optimal postoperative location of care and this needs
            load is possible.77 The ERAS literature concentrates on near zero to be individualized to each health care facility.

            jamaotolaryngology.com                     (Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 297

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


          Clinical Review & Education Review                                         Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery

          Pain Management                                             It seems that the most widely accepted approaches for postop-
          The pretreatment of patients with analgesic drugs to reduce postop- erative flap monitoring include bedside clinical examination for color,
          erative pain, also known as preemptive analgesia, has become part capillaryrefill,surfacetemperaturemonitoring,and,insomecases,pin
          ofamultimodalpaintherapythathasbeenappliedtonumeroustypes pricktestingperformedatfrequentintervals,usuallyhourly,foratleast
          of surgery,95 including head and neck cancer surgery.96 The timing of 24 hours postoperatively.116 Many centers use other monitoring tech-
          analgesia does not appear to affect postoperative pain quality.96,97 nologyinadditiontothesebasicapproaches,withsomereportingim-
          However, premedication with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs provements in flap salvage rates relative to other published series.117
          (NSAIDs) and local wound infiltration has been shown to delay time However,therearenorandomizedcontrolledtrialsinthisareaandmost
          to first analgesia and reduce total analgesic use.97 Clinicians should publications present retrospective or prospective case series.118
          rely on a multimodal approach combining strong opioids, nonopioid
          analgesics, and peripheral or neuraxial local anesthetics acting on dif- Postoperative Mobilization
          ferent sites of the pain pathway.98 Paracetamol is effective for post- Dataonearlymobilizationinpatientsundergoingmajorheadandneck
          operative analgesia99; for reliable blood levels perioperatively the in- resection with free flap reconstruction are limited. A single retrospec-
          travenousroutemaybepreferable.100 Celecoxibhasalsobeenshown tive cohort study119 found that early mobilization was associated with
          to be effective for postoperative pain relief after different surgeries101 fewer pulmonary complications in patients undergoing major head
          andhasnodeleteriouseffectonfreeflapsurvivalorwoundhealing.102 and neck resection with free flap reconstruction. Most data on early
          Although celecoxib, unlike COX-1 inhibitors, has been shown to have mobilization are from patients undergoing major abdominal proce-
          essentiallynoinhibitoryeffectsonplateletaggregation,103 therehave dures, which showed that early mobilization, as part of a comprehen-
          been case reports of associated surgical bleeding104 and so its use sive treatment protocol, reduced complications and overall length of
          should be individualized. Although the efficacy of preoperative gab- stay.120 A secondary analysis of the randomized Laparoscopy in Com-
          apentin seems variable,105 it has been shown to be effective for pa- bination with Fast Track Multimodal Management (LAFA) study121
          tients having tongue reconstruction with a thigh flap.106 showed that early mobilization was a significant independent predic-
             Most head and neck tumor resections imply large resection de- tor of good outcome. The independent contribution of early mobili-
          fects, frequently combined with free flap reconstruction and pro- zation on postoperative clinical outcomes seems to be favorable.
          longed operation times. This results in specific challenges regarding The timing of mobilization is clearly important, because early
          postoperative analgesia. Several randomized studies on tumor resec- mobilization has been shown to be better than late mobilization.119,121
          tion and flap harvesting showed a benefit with patient-controlled an- However, the impact of “dose” of mobilization has not been stud-
          algesia (PCA) by morphine pump.107 The use of PCA does not appre- ied. Data on the number of minutes per day of patient activity have
          ciablyincreasenauseaorvomiting.108 However,multimodalanalgesia been inconsistently reported across studies.122 There are chal-
          using combinations of narcotic and nonnarcotic analgesics have also lenges to getting patients to mobilize early after surgery and a multi-
          shownpromisingresults.Numeroushigh-qualitystudiesindicatethat pronged approach that includes control of postoperative pain and
          multimodal analgesia is effective, reduces narcotic induced side ef- nausea is required,123 because failure to adequately address these
          fects, and facilitates rapid recovery after surgery.109  factors leads to delayed mobilization.
             Several randomized studies have addressed the effects of ad-
          ditional nerve blocks on postoperative pain. Of special interest is the Postoperative Wound Care
          (bilateral) superficial cervical plexus block (SCPB), which has been In evaluating best evidence for postoperative wound care, consider-
          shown in most studies to result in reduced postoperative pain scores ation must be given to both the resection site and the donor site for
          following thyroidectomy with or without parathyroid surgery.110 Use freeflapreconstruction.Inmostcasesprimaryclosurewithdrainplace-
          of the SCPB also resulted in reduced need for intraoperative anal- ment is performed for cervical incisions. A systematic review124 sug-
          gesics and reduced length of hospital stay.111 A meta-analysis112 of gested there is no compelling evidence to support any particular
          799patientsconcludedthatacombinationofbilateralSCPBandgen- wound dressings for wounds healing by primary intention and in gen-
          eral anesthesia reduces pain after surgery to a statistically signifi- eral these may be left open for healing. There is limited evidence that
          cant, but clinically insignificant, magnitude.           topical antimicrobials may reduce surgical site infections.125 There is
                                                                   considerable evidence that active drains are more effective than pas-
          Postoperative Flap Monitoring                            sive drains and reduce drain-related complications.126
          Postoperative free flap monitoring protocols are highly variable be- The evidence for vacuum-assisted closure for complex open cer-
          tween both surgeons and institutions. Multiple methods of monitor- vicalwoundsdemonstratesapotentialbenefit,127 however,thereisless
          ing have been described, from simple clinical examination for evi- evidence for the routine use of these systems for free flap or skin graft
          dence of adequate arterial and venous flow to invasive monitoring donorsites,althoughcase-serieshavebeenpositive.128 Thereisstrong
          techniques, such as implantable Doppler or pO2 monitors.113,114 Each evidence to support polyurethane film for use at skin graft donor sites
          technique has been shown to be effective, but there are advantages with reductions in patient pain and discomfort relative to other dress-
          and disadvantages for each of the approaches. To date, no univer- ingtypes.129 However,alargeRCT130 suggestedthathydrocolloiddress-
          sally acceptable approach to monitoring has been defined. Similarly, ingshadthemostrapidwoundhealingandpolyurethanefilmresulted
          the ideal timing for postoperative flap monitoring, in terms of both in the least patient satisfaction with scar appearance.
          frequency and duration, is variable and best practices have been hard
          to define from an evidentiary basis. Most evidence suggests that vas- Urinary Catheterization
          cular complications will occur within the first 24 hours in most pa- Patientsundergoingmajorheadandneckcancersurgerywithfreeflap
          tients, thus the need for intensive monitoring in the first 24 hours.115 reconstruction universally require postoperative urinary catheteriza-

   298    JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 (Reprinted)           jamaotolaryngology.com

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


            Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                   Review Clinical Review & Education

            tion. When prolonged, urinary catheterization results in urinary tract cretionsmaydelaydecannulationandclosureofthetracheostomysite
            infection (UTI) in 5% to 43% of patients, which can result in pro- andthusincreaseoveralllengthofstay.143 Therefore,postoperativepul-
            longedhospitalstayandotherhospital-relatedcomplications.131 AUTI monaryphysicaltherapyforpatientsaftermajorheadandneckresec-
            inheadandneckpatientsisassociatedwithhigherpostoperativecom- tion and reconstruction is in general felt to be of great benefit.
            plication rates and prolonged hospital length of stay.132   Althoughtherearenodatafrompatientsundergoingmajorhead
               Although there are no studies of catheterization duration in head and neck cancer surgery, a large body of evidence has been gath-
            and neck cancer surgery patients, evidence from other surgical dis- ered on patients after other procedures (ie, abdominal proce-
            ciplines is illustrative. Randomized trials131,133 in postoperative gyne- dures) demonstrating a clear benefit of pulmonary physical therapy
            cologic patients show clear reductions in UTI rates and reductions in after the intervention to avoid pulmonary complications. The type
            hospital length of stay in patients who have shorter duration of cath- of physical therapy consists usually of incentive spirometry (IS), in-
            eterization. These findings are supported by a large meta-analysis134 termittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB), and deep breathing
            of postoperative gynecologic patients. Findings are similar in patients exercises (DBE).144 Each type of physical therapy was found to be
            undergoing thoracic and abdominal surgery.135 Results from studies beneficial in avoiding pulmonary complications, but between the
            of infection rates in patients having transurethral vs suprapubic cath- various types (IS vs IPPB vs DBE) no explicit advantage of 1 or the
            eterization are conflicting. However, a high quality meta-analysis136 other technique could be identified.
            suggests that suprapubic catheterization results in fewer bladder
            infections when prolonged catheterization is required.
                                                                     Conclusions
            Postoperative Tracheostomy Care
            Airwaymanagementinpatientsundergoingmajorheadandneckpro- Improvingperioperativesurgicalcareinanevidence-basedandstruc-
            cedures with free flap reconstruction is important. This includes the tured manner is the primary goal of enhanced recovery after surgery
            protectionoftheairwayintheearlypostoperativephasefromobstruc- protocols.TheERASguidelinesforanumberofsurgicaldisciplineshave
            tion via oropharyngeal edema, swelling of the flap, or bleeding and in reduced surgical complications, overall length of stay, and costs of
            the later postoperative phase during swallowing rehabilitation. care.145 Majorheadandnecksurgicalprocedureswithfreeflaprecon-
               Surgical tracheotomy is in general a low-morbidity procedure struction are among the most complex areas of surgical endeavor and
            with rare severe complications.137 However, it has the potential to require careful preoperative preparation, intraoperative care, and co-
            prolong hospital stay considerably.138 Certain patients may not re- ordinated postoperative care. Although many centers around the
            quire tracheotomy after free flap reconstruction and instead the air- world provide excellent care to head and neck cancer patients, there
            way could be treated by overnight or, if needed, longer oro or na- isstilltremendousvariationintheapplicationofperioperativecareele-
            sotracheal intubation.138-141 These patients include selected oral ments provided to this patient population. We have assembled an in-
            cavity resections without bony reconstruction and certain maxil- ternational expert panel and carefully employed the ERAS Society ap-
            lary reconstructions.138-140 The decision to perform a tracheotomy proachtoprotocoldevelopment.Wecollectedandevaluatedthebest
            is dependent on the presence of severe comorbidities, tumor stage availableevidenceand,usingaformalconsensusbasedapproach,for-
            and location, alcohol consumption, extent of resection, and whether mulatedclearrecommendationsforthemajorelementsofperiopera-
            or not a bilateral neck dissection was performed.139,140 tive care in the major head and neck cancer patient population. Our
               Decannulationaftertracheostomyandclosureofthestomaisim- approach used several of the key elements described by Rosenfeld,
            portant for respiratory and swallowing rehabilitation of the patient. et al146 in Clinical Consensus Statement Development Manual Otolar-
            Various protocols are proposed in the literature to help determine the yngology. In some cases, a paucity of literature specific to head and
            timing of decannulation. However, all protocols usually advise a cap- neck cancer surgery was available and, as a result, several of the rec-
            ping trial of varying duration prior to decannulation.142 Finally, surgi- ommendations are based on data extrapolated from other patient
            cal closure of the tracheostomy site after decannulation may speed populations,particularlythoseundergoingcolorectalsurgery.Wehave
            up recovery.Data suggest that surgical closure results in shorter hos- adapted the recommendations, where appropriate, to better fit the
            pital stay, faster swallowing recovery, cost savings, and eventually needs of patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery and have
            fewer long-term tracheal complications.143 In most cases patients can used the considerable expertise of the working group to make those
            be safely decannulated within 1 week following surgery.  adaptations. We believe the end result is a set of consensus recom-
                                                                     mendations and a proposed measurement framework that will pro-
            Postoperative Pulmonary Physical Therapy                 videabaselineforfutureclinicaleffectivenessresearchandoutcomes
            Pulmonarycomplicationshavethepotentialtojeopardizerecoveryof evaluation in a very important patient population. The proposed con-
            patients after major head and neck ablative and reconstructive proce- sensus recommendations may also have an impact on the quality,
            dures. Pneumonia may delay mobilization, swallowing exercises, and safety,andcostofcareofferedtopatientsundergoingmajorheadand
            alsohasanegativeimpactonwoundhealing.Increasedpulmonaryse- neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction.

            ARTICLE INFORMATION                   Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta Hospital, Camperdown NSW, Australia (Findlay);
            Accepted for Publication: August 9, 2016. (Dort); Cancer Strategic Clinical Network, Alberta ENT Clinic, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland
                                                  Health Services, Calgary, Alberta (Dort, (Huber); Department of Otolaryngology, Winnipeg,
            Published Online: October 13, 2016.   Shea-Budgell); Department of Otolaryngology, Manitoba (Kerr); Department of Oncology,
            doi:10.1001/jamaoto.2016.2981         Division of Head and Neck Surgery, University of Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary,
            Author Affiliations: Section of Otolaryngology, California Davis, Sacramento (Farwell); Department Calgary, Alberta (Shea-Budgell); Department of
            Department of Surgery, Cumming School of of Nutrition and Dietetics, Royal Prince Alfred Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, CHUV,

            jamaotolaryngology.com                     (Reprinted) JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery March 2017 Volume 143, Number 3 299

                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


              Clinical Review & Education  Review                                                                       Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery


              University of Lausanne, Switzerland (Simon);         5. Adams MT, Chen B, Makowski R, Bevans S,           type 2 diabetes patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand.
              University of California, Davis Health System,       Boseley M. Multimedia approach to preoperative       2008;52(7):946-951.
              Sacramento (Uppington); Division of Critical Care    adenotonsillectomy counseling. Otolaryngol Head      21. Seven H, Calis AB, Turgut S. A randomized
              Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,         Neck Surg. 2012;146(3):461-466.                      controlled trial of early oral feeding in
              University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta (Zygun);    6. Chan Y, Irish JC, Wood SJ, et al. Patient         laryngectomized patients. Laryngoscope. 2003;113
              Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and       education and informed consent in head and neck      (6):1076-1079.
              Health, School of Health and Medical Sciences,
                                                                   surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002;      22. Aires FT, Dedivitis RA, Petrarolha SM, Bernardo
              Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden (Ljungqvist);      128(11):1269-1274.
              Division of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery,                                                         WM, Cernea CR, Brandão LG. Early oral feeding
              Department of Surgery, University of Alberta,        7. Yarlagadda BB, Hatton E, Huettig J, Deschler D.   after total laryngectomy: a systematic review. Head
              Edmonton, Alberta (Harris).                          Patient and staff perceptions of social worker       Neck. 2015;37(10):1532-1535.
                                                                   counseling before surgical therapy for head and      23. Talwar B, Findlay M. When is the optimal time
              Author Contributions:  Dr Dort had full access to all neck cancer. Health Soc Work. 2015;40(2):120-124.
              of the data in the study and takes responsibility for                                                     for placing a gastrostomy in patients undergoing
              the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the    8. Clarke LK. Pathways for head and neck surgery:    treatment for head and neck cancer? Curr Opin
              data analysis.                                       a patient-education tool. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2002;   Support Palliat Care. 2012;6(1):41-53.
              Concept and design: Dort, Farwell, Huber,            6(2):78-82.                                          24. Braga M, Ljungqvist O, Soeters P, Fearon K,
              Shea-Budgell, Zygun, Ljungqvist, Harris.             9. Coyle MJ, Main B, Hughes C, et al. Enhanced       Weimann A, Bozzetti F; ESPEN. ESPEN Guidelines
              Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:    recovery after surgery (ERAS) for head and neck      on Parenteral Nutrition: surgery. Clin Nutr. 2009;28
              Farwell, Findlay, Huber, Kerr, Shea-Budgell, Simon,  oncology patients. Clin Otolaryngol. 2016;41(2):118- (4):378-386.
              Uppington, Ljungqvist, Harris.                       126.                                                 25. Khorana AA. Risk assessment and prophylaxis
              Drafting of the manuscript: Dort, Farwell, Findlay,  10. Mortensen K, Nilsson M, Slim K, et al; Enhanced  for VTE in cancer patients. J Natl Compr Canc Netw.
              Huber, Kerr, Shea-Budgell, Simon, Uppington,         Recovery After Surgery (ERAS®) Group. Consensus      2011;9(7):789-797.
              Zygun, Harris.
                                                                   guidelines for enhanced recovery after               26. Agnelli G. Prevention of venous
              Critical revision of the manuscript for important    gastrectomy: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
              intellectual content: Dort, Farwell, Findlay, Huber,                                                      thromboembolism in surgical patients. Circulation.
                                                                   (ERAS®) Society recommendations.  Br J Surg. 2014;   2004;110(24)(suppl 1):IV4-IV12.
              Kerr, Shea-Budgell, Simon, Ljungqvist, Harris.       101(10):1209-1229.
              Administrative, technical, or material support: Dort,                                                     27. Caprini JA, Arcelus JI, Hasty JH, Tamhane AC,
              Kerr, Shea-Budgell, Simon, Ljungqvist, Harris.       11. Findlay M, Bauer J, Brown T, et al.              Fabrega F. Clinical assessment of venous
              Study supervision: Dort, Simon, Zygun, Harris.       Evidence-based practice guidelines for the           thromboembolic risk in surgical patients. Semin
              Other: Uppington.                                    nutritional management of adult patients with head   Thromb Hemost. 1991;17(suppl 3):304-312.
                                                                   and neck cancer. Sydney: Cancer Council Australia.
              Conflict of Interest Disclosures All authors have    http://wiki.cancer.org.au/australia/COSA:Head        28. Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, et al; American
              completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for           _and_neck_cancer_nutrition_guidelines. Accessed      College of Chest Physicians. Prevention of VTE in
              Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and    on: September 12, 2015.                              nonorthopedic surgical patients: antithrombotic
              none were reported. Dr Ljungqvist is a founding                                                           therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed:
              member of the ERAS Study Group and ERAS              12. Ottery FD. Patient generated-subjective global   American College of Chest Physicians
              Society, an Executive Officer of the ERAS Society,   assessment. In: McCallum PD, Polisena CG, eds. The   evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest.
              and is the founder and a shareholder in EnCARE AB,   clinical guide to oncology nutrition. Chicago: The   2012;141(2)(suppl):e227S-e277S.
                                                                   American Dietetic Association; 2000:11-23.
              Sweden 397 (http://www.encare.se)  the provider of                                                        29. Buesing KL, Mullapudi B, Flowers KA. Deep
              the ERAS Interactive Audit System. In addition, Dr   13. Casas Rodera P, de Luis DA, Gómez Candela C,     venous thrombosis and venous thromboembolism
              Ljungqvist was supported by funds from               Culebras JM. Immunoenhanced enteral nutrition        prophylaxis. Surg Clin North Am. 2015;95(2):285-300.
              Nyckelfonden, Örebro Sweden.                         formulas in head and neck cancer surgery:
                                                                   a systematic review. Nutr Hosp. 2012;27(3):681-690.  30. Shuman AG, Hu HM, Pannucci CJ, Jackson CR,
              Additional Information: ERAS is a registered                                                              Bradford CR, Bahl V. Stratifying the risk of venous
              trademark for goods and services owned and           14. Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Weitzel L, Wischmeyer     thromboembolism in otolaryngology.  Otolaryngol
              provided by the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery      PE, Ochoa JB, Heyland DK. Perioperative use of       Head Neck Surg. 2012;146(5):719-724.
              Society for Perioperative Care (www.erasscoiety.org). arginine-supplemented diets: a systematic review
                                                                                                                        31. Bahl V, Shuman AG, Hu HM, et al.
              Additional Contributions: The authors                of the evidence. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(3):385-399,
                                                                   399.e1.                                              Chemoprophylaxis for venous thromboembolism in
              acknowledge the Cancer Strategic Clinical Network,                                                        otolaryngology. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
              Alberta Health Services for supporting the design    15. Lambert E, Carey S. Practice guideline           2014;140(11):999-1005.
              and conduct of the study.                            recommendations on perioperative fasting:
                                                                   a systematic review. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr.   32. Lee KT, Mun GH. The efficacy of postoperative
              REFERENCES                                           2015;0148607114567713. doi:10.1177                   antithrombotics in free flap surgery: a systematic
                                                                   /0148607114567713                                    review and meta-analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg.
              1. Lassen K, Soop M, Nygren J, et al; Enhanced                                                            2015;135(4):1124-1139.
              Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Group. Consensus       16. Pogatschnik C, Steiger E. Review of
              review of optimal perioperative care in colorectal   preoperative carbohydrate loading. Nutr Clin Pract.  33. Busch CJ, Knecht R, Münscher A, Matern J,
              surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS)      2015;30(5):660-664.                                  Dalchow C, Lörincz BB. Postoperative antibiotic
                                                                                                                        prophylaxis in clean-contaminated head and neck
              Group recommendations.   Arch Surg. 2009;144(10):    17. Awad S, Varadhan KK, Ljungqvist O, Lobo DN.
              961-969.                                                                                                  oncologic surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Eur
                                                                   A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials on   Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016;273(9):2805-2811.
              2. Muller S, Zalunardo MP, Hubner M, Clavien PA,     preoperative oral carbohydrate treatment in
              Demartines N; Zurich Fast Track Study Group.         elective surgery. Clin Nutr. 2013;32(1):34-44.       34. Skitarelić N, Morović M, Manestar D. Antibiotic
                                                                                                                        prophylaxis in clean-contaminated head and neck
              A fast-track program reduces complications and       18. Bilku DK, Dennison AR, Hall TC, Metcalfe MS,
              length of hospital stay after open colonic surgery.                                                       oncological surgery. J Craniomaxillofac Surg.2007;
                                                                   Garcea G. Role of preoperative carbohydrate          35(1):15-20.
              Gastroenterology. 2009;136(3):842-847.               loading: a systematic review. Ann R Coll Surg Engl.
              3. Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. Oxford        2014;96(1):15-22.                                    35. Rodrigo JP, Alvarez JC, Gómez JR, Suárez C,
              Centre for Evidence-based Medicine – Levels of                                                            Fernández JA, Martínez JA. Comparison of three
                                                                   19. Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L, Herbison GP, Soop   prophylactic antibiotic regimens in
              Evidence (March 2009). URL:  http://www.cebm         M, Nygren J. Preoperative carbohydrate treatment
              .net/oxford-centre-evidence-based-medicine                                                                clean-contaminated head and neck surgery. Head
                                                                   for enhancing recovery after elective surgery.       Neck. 1997;19(3):188-193.
              -levels-evidence-march-2009/. Accessed on            Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;8(8):CD009161.
              January 2, 2015.                                                                                          36. Liu SA, Tung KC, Shiao JY, Chiu YT. Preliminary
                                                                   20. Gustafsson UO, Nygren J, Thorell A, et al.       report of associated factors in wound infection
              4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE         Pre-operative carbohydrate loading may be used in
              Working Group. Going from evidence to                                                                     after major head and neck neoplasm
              recommendations.  BMJ. 2008;336(7652):1049-1051.

     300      JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery        March 2017   Volume 143, Number 3   (Reprinted)                                      jamaotolaryngology.com

                                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                                                      Review   Clinical Review & Education


                 operations—does the duration of prophylactic         premedication of outpatients under IVRA. Middle      cutaneous warming systems to prevent
                 antibiotic matter? J Laryngol Otol. 2008;122(4):     East J Anaesthesiol. 2011;21(1):53-60.               hypothermia.  J Clin Nurs. 2009;18(5):627-636.
                 403-408.                                             53. O’Dell K. Predictors of difficult intubation and 68. Negishi C, Hasegawa K, Mukai S, Nakagawa F,
                 37. Carroll WR, Rosenstiel D, Fix JR, et al.         the otolaryngology perioperative consult.            Ozaki M, Sessler DI. Resistive-heating and forced-air
                 Three-dose vs extended-course clindamycin            Anesthesiol Clin. 2015;33(2):279-290.                warming are comparably effective. Anesth Analg.
                 prophylaxis for free-flap reconstruction of the head 54. Aziz MF, Healy D, Kheterpal S, Fu RF, Dillman D, 2003;96(6):1683-1687.
                 and neck. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003;     Brambrink AM. Routine clinical practice              69. Sessler DI, Schroeder M. Heat loss in humans
                 129(7):771-774.                                      effectiveness of the Glidescope in difficult airway  covered with cotton hospital blankets. Anesth Analg.
                 38. Wenisch C, Laferl H, Szell M, et al. A holistic  management: an analysis of 2,004 Glidescope          1993;77(1):73-77.
                 approach to MRSA eradication in critically ill       intubations, complications, and failures from two    70. Campbell G, Alderson P, Smith AF, Warttig S.
                 patients with MRSA pneumonia.  Infection. 2006;34    institutions. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(1):34-41.     Warming of intravenous and irrigation fluids for
                 (3):148-154.                                         55. Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, et al;      preventing inadvertent perioperative hypothermia.
                 39. Simons JP, Johnson JT, Yu VL, et al. The role of American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force     Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(4):CD009891.
                 topical antibiotic prophylaxis in patients           on Management of the Difficult Airway. Practice      doi:10.1002/14651858.CD009891.pub2.
                 undergoing contaminated head and neck surgery        guidelines for management of the difficult airway:   71. Cordeiro PG, Santamaria E, Hu QY, Heerdt P.
                 with flap reconstruction. Laryngoscope. 2001;111(2): an updated report by the American Society of         Effects of vasoactive medications on the blood flow
                 329-335.                                             Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of        of island musculocutaneous flaps in swine. Ann
                 40. Shuman AG, Shuman EK, Hauff SJ, et al.           the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 2013;118(2):   Plast Surg. 1997;39(5):524-531.
                                                                      251-270.
                 Preoperative topical antimicrobial decolonization in                                                      72. Kelly DA, Reynolds M, Crantford C, Pestana IA.
                 head and neck surgery. Laryngoscope. 2012;122(11):   56. Feldheiser A, Aziz O, Baldini G, et al. Enhanced Impact of intraoperative vasopressor use in free
                 2454-2460.                                           Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) for gastrointestinal   tissue transfer for head, neck, and extremity
                 41. Eryilmaz T, Sencan A, Camgoz N, Ak B, Yavuzer    surgery, part 2: consensus statement for             reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg. 2014;72(6):S135-S138.
                 R. A challenging problem that concerns the           anaesthesia practice. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand.
                                                                      2016;60(3):289-334.                                  73. Chen C, Nguyen MD, Bar-Meir E, et al. Effects of
                 aesthetic surgeon: postoperative nausea and                                                               vasopressor administration on the outcomes of
                 vomiting. Ann Plast Surg. 2008;61(5):489-491.        57. Reynolds L, Beckmann J, Kurz A. Perioperative    microsurgical breast reconstruction. Ann Plast Surg.
                 42. Silva AC, O’Ryan F, Poor DB. Postoperative       complications of hypothermia. Best Pract Res Clin    2010;65(1):28-31.
                                                                      Anaesthesiol. 2008;22(4):645-657.
                 nausea and vomiting (PONV) after orthognathic                                                             74. Scholz A, Pugh S, Fardy M, Shafik M, Hall JE.
                 surgery: a retrospective study and literature review. 58. Frank SM, Fleisher LA, Breslow MJ, et al.       The effect of dobutamine on blood flow of free
                 J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2006;64(9):1385-1397.        Perioperative maintenance of normothermia            tissue transfer flaps during head and neck
                 43. Kaushal J, Gupta MC, Kaushal V, et al. Clinical  reduces the incidence of morbid cardiac events:      reconstructive surgery. Anaesthesia. 2009;64(10):
                 evaluation of two antiemetic combinations            a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 1997;277(14):1127- 1089-1093.
                                                                      1134.
                 palonosetron dexamethasone versus ondansetron                                                             75. Farwell DG, Reilly DF, Weymuller EA Jr,
                 dexamethasone in chemotherapy of head and neck       59. Clark JR, McCluskey SA, Hall F, et al. Predictors Greenberg DL, Staiger TO, Futran NA. Predictors of
                 cancer. Singapore Med J. 2010;51(11):871-875.        of morbidity following free flap reconstruction for  perioperative complications in head and neck
                 44. Gan TJ, Meyer T, Apfel CC, et al; Department of  cancer of the head and neck. Head Neck. 2007;29      patients. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002;
                 Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center.      (12):1090-1101.                                      128(5):505-511.
                 Consensus guidelines for managing postoperative      60. Sumer BD, Myers LL, Leach J, Truelson JM.        76. Nelson JA, Fischer JP, Grover R, et al.
                 nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2003;97(1):       Correlation between intraoperative hypothermia       Intraoperative perfusion management impacts
                 62-71.                                               and perioperative morbidity in patients with head    postoperative outcomes: an analysis of 682
                 45. Ham SY, Shim YH, Kim EH, Son MJ, Park WS,        and neck cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.    autologous breast reconstruction patients. J Plast
                 Lee JS. Aprepitant for antiemesis after laparoscopic 2009;135(7):682-686.                                 Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2015;68(2):175-183.
                 gynaecological surgery: A randomised controlled      61. Hill JB, Sexton KW, Bartlett EL, et al. The clinical 77. Bellamy MC. Wet, dry or something else? Br J
                 trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2016;33(2):90-95.         role of intraoperative core temperature in free      Anaesth. 2006;97(6):755-757.
                                                                      tissue transfer. Ann Plast Surg. 2015;75(6):620-624.
                 46. Vari A, Gazzanelli S, Cavallaro G, et al.                                                             78. Miller TE, Raghunathan K, Gan TJ.
                 Post-operative nausea and vomiting (PONV) after      62. De Witte J, Sessler DI. Perioperative shivering: State-of-the-art fluid management in the operating
                 thyroid surgery: a prospective, randomized study     physiology and pharmacology.  Anesthesiology.        room.  Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2014;28
                 comparing totally intravenous versus inhalational    2002;96(2):467-484.                                  (3):261-273.
                 anesthetics. Am Surg. 2010;76(3):325-328.
                                                                      63. Just B, Delva E, Camus Y, Lienhart A. Oxygen     79. Martina JR, Westerhof BE, van Goudoever J,
                 47. Sheen MJ, Chang FL, Ho ST. Anesthetic            uptake during recovery following naloxone.           et al. Noninvasive continuous arterial blood
                 premedication: new horizons of an old practice.      relationship with intraoperative heat loss.          pressure monitoring with Nexfin®. Anesthesiology.
                 Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan. 2014;52(3):134-142.        Anesthesiology. 1992;76(1):60-64.                    2012;116(5):1092-1103.
                 48. Leigh JM, Walker J, Janaganathan P. Effect of    64. Scott AV, Stonemetz JL, Wasey JO, et al.         80. Chen G, Meng L, Alexander B, Tran NP, Kain
                 preoperative anaesthetic visit on anxiety. Br Med J. Compliance with surgical care improvement project    ZN, Cannesson M. Comparison of noninvasive
                 1977;2(6093):987-989.                                for body temperature management (SCIP Inf-10) is     cardiac output measurements using the Nexfin
                 49. Hole J, Hirsch M, Ball E, Meads C. Music as an   associated with improved clinical outcomes.          monitoring device and the esophageal Doppler.
                 aid for postoperative recovery in adults:            Anesthesiology. 2015;123(1):116-125.                 J Clin Anesth. 2012;24(4):275-283.
                 a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.       65. De Witte JL, Demeyer C, Vandemaele E.            81. Noble MI. The Frank–Starling curve. Clin Sci Mol
                 2015;386(10004):1659-1671.                           Resistive-heating or forced-air warming for the      Med. 1978;54(1):1-7.
                 50. Hausel J, Nygren J, Lagerkranser M, et al.       prevention of redistribution hypothermia. Anesth
                                                                      Analg. 2010;110(3):829-833.                          82. Hofer CK, Cannesson M. Monitoring fluid
                 A carbohydrate-rich drink reduces preoperative                                                            responsiveness. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan. 2011;49
                 discomfort in elective surgery patients. Anesth Analg. 66. Shin J, Kim J, Song K, Kwak Y. Core            (2):59-65.
                 2001;93(5):1344-1350.                                temperature measurement in therapeutic
                                                                                                                           83. Brandstrup B, Svendsen PE, Rasmussen M,
                 51. Walker KJ, Smith AF. Premedication for anxiety   hypothermia according to different phases:
                                                                      comparison of bladder, rectal, and tympanic versus   et al. Which goal for fluid therapy during colorectal
                 in adult day surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.                                                         surgery is followed by the best outcome:
                 2009;(4):CD002192. doi:10.1002/14651858              pulmonary artery methods.  Resuscitation. 2013;
                                                                      84(6):810-817.                                       near-maximal stroke volume or zero fluid balance?
                 .CD002192.                                                                                                Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(2):191-199.
                 52. Mizrak A, Gul R, Ganidagli S, Karakurum G,       67. Galvão CM, Marck PB, Sawada NO, Clark AM.
                                                                      A systematic review of the effectiveness of          84. Jensen NF, Todd MM, Block RI, Hegtvedt RL,
                 Keskinkilic G, Oner U. Dexmedetomidine                                                                    McCulloch TM. The efficacy of routine central

                 jamaotolaryngology.com                                       (Reprinted)   JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery       March 2017   Volume 143, Number 3       301

                                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


              Clinical Review & Education  Review                                                                       Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery


              venous monitoring in major head and neck surgery:    100. Jarde O, Boccard E. Parenteral vs oral route    of current techniques--part I. Non-invasive
              a retrospective review. J Clin Anesth. 1995;7(2):    increases paracetamol efficacy. Clin Drug Investig.  techniques. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009;47(5):
              119-125.                                             1997;14(6):474-481.                                  351-355.
              85. Puram SV, Yarlagadda BB, Sethi R, et al.         101. Sekiguchi H, Inoue G, Nakazawa T, et al.        114. Abdel-Galil K, Mitchell D. Postoperative
              Transfusion in head and neck free flap patients:     Loxoprofen sodium and celecoxib for postoperative    monitoring of microsurgical free-tissue transfers for
              practice patterns and a comparative analysis by flap pain in patients after spinal surgery: a randomized  head and neck reconstruction: a systematic review
              type. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;152(3):       comparative study. J Orthop Sci. 2015;20(4):617-623. of current techniques--part II. Invasive techniques.
              449-457.                                             102. Wax MK, Reh DD, Levack MM. Effect of            Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009;47(6):438-442.
              86. Danan D, Smolkin ME, Varhegyi NE, Bakos SR,      celecoxib on fasciocutaneous flap survival and       115. Pattani KM, Byrne P, Boahene K, Richmon J.
              Jameson MJ, Shonka DC Jr. Impact of blood            revascularization. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2007;9(2): What makes a good flap go bad? A critical analysis
              transfusions on patients with head and neck cancer   120-124.                                             of the literature of intraoperative factors related to
              undergoing free tissue transfer. Laryngoscope.       103. Scott WW, Levy M, Rickert KL, Madden CJ,        free flap failure. Laryngoscope. 2010;120(4):717-723.
              2015;125(1):86-91.                                   Beshay JE, Sarode R. Assessment of common            116. Cornejo A, Ivatury S, Crane CN, Myers JG,
              87. Spahn DR, Spahn GH, Stein P. Evidence base for   nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications by        Wang HT. Analysis of free flap complications and
              restrictive transfusion triggers in high-risk patients. whole blood aggregometry: a clinical evaluation for utilization of intensive care unit monitoring.
              Transfus Med Hemother. 2015;42(2):110-114.           the perioperative setting. World Neurosurg. 2014;    J Reconstr Microsurg. 2013;29(7):473-479.
              88. Fominskiy E, Putzu A, Monaco F, et al. Liberal   82(5):e633-e638.                                     117. Chae MP, Rozen WM, Whitaker IS, et al. Current
              transfusion strategy improves survival in            104. Stammschulte T, Brune K, Brack A,               evidence for postoperative monitoring of
              perioperative but not in critically ill patients:    Augenstein H, Arends G, Gundert-Remy U.              microvascular free flaps: a systematic review. Ann
              a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Br J Anaesth.  [Unexpected hemorrhage complications in              Plast Surg. 2015;74(5):621-632.
              2015;115(4):511-519.                                 association with celecoxib. Spontaneously reported   118. Kruse AL, Luebbers HT, Grätz KW, Obwegeser
              89. Carson JL, Grossman BJ, Kleinman S, et al;       case series after perioperative pain treatment in    JA. Free flap monitoring protocol. J Craniofac Surg.
              Clinical Transfusion Medicine Committee of the       gynecological operations]. Anaesthesist. 2014;63     2010;21(4):1262-1263.
                                                                   (12):958-960.
              AABB. Red blood cell transfusion: a clinical practice                                                     119. Yeung JK, Harrop R, McCreary O, et al. Delayed
              guideline from the AABB. Ann Intern Med. 2012;       105. Paul JE, Nantha-Aree M, Buckley N, et al.       mobilization after microsurgical reconstruction: an
              157(1):49-58.                                        Randomized controlled trial of gabapentin as an      independent risk factor for pneumonia.
              90. Nkenke E, Vairaktaris E, Stelzle F, Neukam FW,   adjunct to perioperative analgesia in total hip      Laryngoscope. 2013;123(12):2996-3000.
              St Pierre M. No reduction in complication rate by    arthroplasty patients. Can J Anaesth. 2015;62(5):
                                                                   476-484.                                             120. Jones C, Kelliher L, Dickinson M, et al.
              stay in the intensive care unit for patients                                                              Randomized clinical trial on enhanced recovery
              undergoing surgery for head and neck cancer and      106. Chiu TW, Leung CCH, Lau EYK, Burd A.            versus standard care following open liver resection.
              microvascular reconstruction. Head Neck. 2009;31     Analgesic effects of preoperative gabapentin after   Br J Surg. 2013;100(8):1015-1024.
              (11):1461-1469.                                      tongue reconstruction with the anterolateral thigh
                                                                   flap. Hong Kong Med J. 2012;18(1):30-34.             121. Vlug MS, Bartels SA, Wind J, Ubbink DT,
              91. Morton RP. The need of ICU admission after                                                            Hollmann MW, Bemelman WA; Collaborative LAFA
              major head and neck surgery. ANZ J Surg. 2002;72     107. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Sawicki K, Anderson D, Study Group. Which fast track elements predict
              (1):3-4.                                             Origitano TC. Morphine/ondansetron PCA for           early recovery after colon cancer surgery?
              92. To EW, Tsang WM, Lai EC, Chu MC.                 postoperative pain, nausea, and vomiting after skull Colorectal Dis. 2012;14(8):1001-1008.
              Retrospective study on the need of intensive care    base surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006;
                                                                   135(2):175-181.                                      122. Braumann C, Guenther N, Wendling P, et al;
              unit admission after major head and neck surgery.                                                         Fast-Track Colon II Quality Assurance Group.
              ANZ J Surg. 2002;72(1):11-14.                        108. Yoo Y-C, Bai S-J, Lee K-Y, Shin S, Choi EK, Lee Multimodal perioperative rehabilitation in elective
              93. Downey RJ, Friedlander P, Groeger J, et al.      JW. Total intravenous anesthesia with propofol       conventional resection of colonic cancer: results
              Critical care for the severely ill head and neck     reduces postoperative nausea and vomiting in         from the German Multicenter Quality Assurance
              patient. Crit Care Med. 1999;27(1):95-97.            patients undergoing robot-assisted laparoscopic      Program ‘Fast-Track Colon II’. Dig Surg. 2009;26(2):
                                                                   radical prostatectomy: a prospective randomized      123-129.
              94. de Melo GM, Ribeiro KC, Kowalski LP,             trial. Yonsei Med J. 2012;53(6):1197-1202.
              Deheinzelin D. Risk factors for postoperative                                                             123. Chandrakantan A, Glass PS. Multimodal
              complications in oral cancer and their prognostic    109. Gupta P, Sharma H, Jethava DD, et al. Use of    therapies for postoperative nausea and vomiting,
              implications. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.       dexmedetomidine for multimodal analgesia in head     and pain. Br J Anaesth. 2011;107(suppl 1):i27-i40.
              2001;127(7):828-833.                                 and neck cancer surgeries: a prospective
                                                                   randomized double blind control study. IOSR Journ    124. Dumville JC, Gray TA, Walter CJ, Sharp CA,
              95. Halawi MJ, Grant SA, Bolognesi MP. Multimodal    Dental and Med Sci. 2015;14(4):8-13.                 Page T. Dressings for the prevention of surgical site
              analgesia for total joint arthroplasty. Orthopedics.                                                      infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;9(9):
              2015;38(7):e616-e625.                                110. Egan RJ, Hopkins JC, Beamish AJ, Shah R,        CD003091.
                                                                   Edwards AG, Morgan JD. Randomized clinical trial
              96. Balandin VV, Gorobets ES. [Postoperative         of intraoperative superficial cervical plexus block  125. Sheth VM, Weitzul S. Postoperative topical
              analgesia with nefopam and non-steroidal             versus incisional local anaesthesia in thyroid and   antimicrobial use. Dermatitis. 2008;19(4):181-189.
              anti-inflammatory drugs in patients after surgery    parathyroid surgery. Br J Surg. 2013;100(13):1732-   126. Schwarz W, Willy C, Ndjee C. [Gravity or
              for tumors of head and neck]. Anesteziol Reanimatol. 1738.                                                suction drainage in thyroid surgery? Control of
              2014;(1):40-43.
                                                                   111. Shih ML, Duh QY, Hsieh CB, et al. Bilateral     efficacy with ultrasound determination of residual
              97. Møiniche S, Kehlet H, Dahl JB. A qualitative and superficial cervical plexus block combined with      hematoma].   Langenbecks Arch Chir. 1996;381(6):
              quantitative systematic review of preemptive         general anesthesia administered in thyroid           337-342.
              analgesia for postoperative pain relief: the role of operations. World J Surg. 2010;34(10):2338-2343.     127. Satteson ES, Crantford JC, Wood J, David LR.
              timing of analgesia. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(3):                                                          Outcomes of vacuum-assisted therapy in the
              725-741.                                             112. Warschkow R, Tarantino I, Jensen K, et al.
                                                                   Bilateral superficial cervical plexus block in       treatment of head and neck wounds. J Craniofac Surg.
              98. Grape S, Tramèr MR. Do we need preemptive        combination with general anesthesia has a low        2015;26(7):e599-e602.
              analgesia for the treatment of postoperative pain?   efficacy in thyroid surgery: a meta-analysis of      128. Webster J, Scuffham P, Stankiewicz M,
              Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2007;21(1):51-63.  randomized controlled trials. Thyroid. 2012;22(1):   Chaboyer WP. Negative pressure wound therapy for
              99. Barden J, Edwards J, Moore A, McQuay H.          44-52.                                               skin grafts and surgical wounds healing by primary
              Single dose oral paracetamol (acetaminophen) for     113. Abdel-Galil K, Mitchell D. Postoperative        intention. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;10
              postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.      monitoring of microsurgical free tissue transfers for (10):CD009261.
              2004;(1):CD004602.                                   head and neck reconstruction: a systematic review    129. Dornseifer U, Lonic D, Gerstung TI, et al. The
                                                                                                                        ideal split-thickness skin graft donor-site dressing:


     302      JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery        March 2017   Volume 143, Number 3   (Reprinted)                                      jamaotolaryngology.com

                                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025


                 Perioperative Care in Head and Neck Cancer Surgery                                                                      Review   Clinical Review & Education


                 a clinical comparative trial of a modified           transurethral catheterization for bladder drainage   142. Santus P, Gramegna A, Radovanovic D, et al.
                 polyurethane dressing and aquacel. Plast Reconstr    after abdominal surgery. Br J Surg. 2006;93(9):      A systematic review on tracheostomy
                 Surg. 2011;128(4):918-924.                           1038-1044.                                           decannulation: a proposal of a quantitative
                 130. Beam JW. Management of superficial to           136. Zaouter C, Wuethrich P, Miccoli M, Carli F.     semiquantitative clinical score. BMC Pulm Med.
                 partial-thickness wounds. J Athl Train. 2007;42(3):  Early removal of urinary catheter leads to greater   2014;14:201.
                 422-424.                                             post-void residuals in patients with thoracic        143. Brookes JT, Seikaly H, Diamond C, Mechor B,
                 131. Chai J, Pun TC. A prospective randomized trial  epidural. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2012;56(8):       Harris JR. Prospective randomized trial comparing
                 to compare immediate and 24-hour delayed             1020-1025.                                           the effect of early suturing of tracheostomy sites on
                 catheter removal following total abdominal           137. Higgins KM, Punthakee X. Meta-analysis          postoperative patient swallowing and
                 hysterectomy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2011;90     comparison of open versus percutaneous               rehabilitation. J Otolaryngol. 2006;35(2):77-82.
                 (5):478-482.                                         tracheostomy. Laryngoscope. 2007;117(3):447-454.     144. Thomas JA, McIntosh JM. Are incentive
                 132. Chan JY, Semenov YR, Gourin CG.                 138. Moore MG, Bhrany AD, Francis DO, Yueh B,        spirometry, intermittent positive pressure
                 Postoperative urinary tract infection and            Futran ND. Use of nasotracheal intubation in         breathing, and deep breathing exercises effective in
                 short-term outcomes and costs in head and neck       patients receiving oral cavity free flap             the prevention of postoperative pulmonary
                 cancer surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;    reconstruction. Head Neck. 2010;32(8):1056-1061.     complications after upper abdominal surgery?
                 148(4):602-610.                                                                                           a systematic overview and meta-analysis. Phys Ther.
                                                                      139. Kruse-Lösler B, Langer E, Reich A, Joos U,      1994;74(1):3-10.
                 133. Ahmed MR, Sayed Ahmed WA, Atwa KA,              Kleinheinz J. Score system for elective tracheotomy
                 Metwally L. Timing of urinary catheter removal       in major head and neck tumour surgery. Acta          145. Stowers MD, Manuopangai L, Hill AG, Gray JR,
                 after uncomplicated total abdominal hysterectomy:    Anaesthesiol Scand. 2005;49(5):654-659.              Coleman B, Munro JT. Enhanced Recovery After
                                                                                                                           Surgery in elective hip and knee arthroplasty
                 a prospective randomized trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 140. Cameron M, Corner A, Diba A, Hankins M.
                 Reprod Biol. 2014;176:60-63.                                                                              reduces length of hospital stay. ANZ J Surg. 2016;86
                                                                      Development of a tracheostomy scoring system to      (6):475-479. Epub ahead of print.
                 134. Zhang P, Hu WL, Cheng B, Cheng L, Xiong XK,     guide airway management after major head and
                 Zeng YJ. A systematic review and meta-analysis       neck surgery. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009;38    146. Rosenfeld RM, Nnacheta LC, Corrigan MD.
                 comparing immediate and delayed catheter             (8):846-849.                                         Clinical Consensus Statement Development
                 removal following uncomplicated hysterectomy. Int                                                         Manual. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;153(2)
                                                                      141. Coyle MJ, Tyrrell R, Godden A, et al. Replacing (suppl):S1-S14.
                 Urogynecol J. 2015;26(5):665-674.                    tracheostomy with overnight intubation to manage
                 135. McPhail MJ, Abu-Hilal M, Johnson CD.            the airway in head and neck oncology patients:
                 A meta-analysis comparing suprapubic and             towards an improved recovery. Br J Oral Maxillofac
                                                                      Surg. 2013;51(6):493-496.

                                                                                  Invited Commentary
                 Evidence-Based Perioperative Treatment
                 After Free Tissue Reconstruction
                 Moving From Alchemy to Data
                 Samir S. Khariwala, MD, MS, FACS

                 The use of free tissue transfer       (FTT) in the head and neck has            surgeons are frequently reluctant to try new and untested tech-
                 made considerable strides since the first procedures were                       niques or engage in controlled randomized trial designs.
                 performed nearly 40 years ago.1           Free tissue transfer began            Whether the technique in question is anticoagulation, antibi-
                                                         as a risky and extremely time-          otics, vasoactive agents, or free flap monitoring, too often the
                                                         consuming procedure, yet                rationale for decision making is: “I’ve always done it this way…”
                 Related article page 292                through improved instru-                or “This is how Dr. X did it.” Given the serious consequences
                                                         mentation and accumulated               of flap loss, this reaction by free flap surgeons, most of whom
                 experience, head and neck defects are now routinely treated                     are habitually meticulous and suspicious, is certainly under-
                 with FTT. Furthermore, the expansion of indications for FTT                     standable. Still, the era of evidence-based medicine is well upon
                 has resulted in surgeons tackling cases of increasingly greater                 us and we must seek to base our practice on the strongest data
                 difficulty with regularity.                                                     available.
                      For example, it is not uncommon for patients who have                           In this issue of      JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck
                 been doubly radiated and/or had prior neck dissections to re-                   Surgery, Dort et al6    propose recommendations for periopera-
                 ceive second, third, or even fourth free flaps,2          which may re-         tive treatment of patients receiving major head and neck can-
                 quire vein grafting and accessing the internal mammary                          cer surgery with free flap reconstruction. This effort is based
                 vessels.3   Free flap failure will almost invariably increase the               on the mission of, and endorsed by, the Enhanced Recovery
                 length of hospital stay and cost of care. In addition, free flap                After Surgery (ERAS) Society. Based on a finding that ERAS rec-
                 failure may be associated with open wounds that result in de-                   ommendations developed for patients undergoing colorectal
                 creased quality of life for patients. Free flap surgeons often rely             surgery resulted in functional improvements after surgery, the
                 on patient treatment techniques handed down from                   experi-      authors sought to apply a similar approach for patients receiv-
                 enced surgeons, which may lack a sound scientific basis. Be-                    ing free flaps. To accomplish this, they performed an exten-
                 cause of their concern about serious complications, free flap                   sive literature search and attempted to coalesce a series of of-

                 jamaotolaryngology.com                                       (Reprinted)   JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery       March 2017   Volume 143, Number 3       303

                                                       Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by National Taiwan University user on 04/28/2025



