SOCIETY FOR VASCULAR SURGERY DOCUMENT Perioperative care in open aortic vascular surgery: A consensus statement by the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society and Society for Vascular Surgery Katharine L. McGinigle, MD, MPH,a Emily L. Spangler, MD, MS,b Adam C. Pichel, MB, ChB, FRCA,c Katie Ayyash, MBChB, BSc, FRCA, MSc,d Shipra Arya, MD, MS,e Alberto M. Settembrini, MD,f Joy Garg, MD,g Merin M. Thomas, PA-C,h Kate E. Dell, DNP, AGACNP-BC,i Iris J. Swiderski, DHSc, MPAS, PA-C,j Fae Lindo, NP,k Mark G. Davies, MD, PhD, MBA,l Carlo Setacci, MD,m Richard D. Urman, MD, MBA,n Simon J. Howell, MA, MRCP, FRCA, MSc, MD,o Olle Ljungqvist, MD, PhD,p and Hans D. de Boer, MD, PhD, BC,q Chapel Hill, NC; Birmingham, AL; Manchester, York, and Leeds, UK; Palo Alto, CA; Milan, Italy; New Hyde Park, NY; Lafayette, IN; Melbourne, FL; San Antonio, TX; Siena, Italy; Boston, MA; Orebro, Sweden; and Groningen, The Netherlands ABSTRACT The Society for Vascular Surgery and the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society formally collaborated and elected an international, multidisciplinary panel of experts to review the literature and provide evidence-based recommendations related to all the health care received in the perioperative period for patients undergoing open abdominal aortic operations (both transabdominal and retroperitoneal approaches, including supraceliac, suprarenal, and infrarenal clamp sites) for aortic aneurysm and aortoiliac occlusive disease. Structured around the Enhanced Recovery After Surgery core elements, 36 recommendations were made and organized into preadmission, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative recommendations. (J Vasc Surg 2022;75:1796-820.) Keywords: Abdominal aortic aneurysm; Analgesia and anesthesia; Aortic occlusive disease; Evidence-based recommendations; Enhanced recovery after surgery; Guidelines; Perioperative care TABLE OF CONTENTS DISCLAIMER ................................................................................ 1797 METHODS ..................................................................................... 1798 Formation of the guideline development group and selection of guideline topics ............. 1798 Literature search strategy ................................................ 1798 Quality assessment, data analyses and consensus generation ......................................................... 1798 RESULTS ....................................................................................... 1798 PREADMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS ........................ 1798 1. Patient information, education, and counseling .................................................................................... 1798 2. Preadmission screening, assessment, and optimization (a, anemia screening; b, nutritional deficiency; c, frailty; d, delirium risk; e, tobacco and alcohol overconsumption; f, medical risk) ............................................................................... 1799 From the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hilla ; the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birminghamb; the Department of Anaesthesia, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchesterc ; the Department of Perioperative Medicine (Merit), York and Scarborough Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Yorkd; the Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Altoe ; the Fondazione IRCCS, C? Granda Policlinico, Milanf ; Department of Vascular Surgery, Kaiser Permanente San Leandro, San Leandrog ; the Lenox Hill Hospital, Northwell Health, New Hyde Parkh ; the Ascension Medical Group, Lafayettei ; the Medical Associates of Brevard, Melbournej ; the Stanford University Hospital, Palo Altok ; the Department of Surgery, Joe R. & Teresa Lozano Long School of Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antoniol ; the Department of Surgery, University of Siena, Sienam; the Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women・s Hospital, Bostonn ; the Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St. James・s, University of Leeds, Leedso ; the Department of Surgery, School of Medical Sciences, Orebro University, Orebrop ; and the Department of Anesthesiology, Pain Medicine and Procedure Sedation and Analgesia, Martini General Hospital Groningen, Groningen.q Author conflict of interest: H.D.B. reports ERAS Society Executive Committee; Global Advisory Board of Merck & Co.; Scientific Advisory Board of Senzime; Global Advisory Board of NMD Pharma; Research and Scientific Committees of the European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care; Receiving research grants from Merck & Co, and The Medicines Company; S.J.H. reports Consultancy fees from Edwards Life Sciences and Research funding from Abbott; O.L. reports co-founder ERAS Society, founder and stock owner of Encare AB, advisor Nutricia A/S (The Netherlands), Advisor Abbott (USA), Advisor Merck (USA), Advisor AMN (Canada), speaker honoraria from Fesenius-Kabi, Braun, Nutricia, Nestle, Merck, Encare, Medtronic, previous patent holder of carbohydrate drink; K.L.M. reports speaking honorarium from Medtronic, Inc; R.D.U. reports Fees and/or funding: Pfizer, Merck, Covidien, Acel Rx, Heron, Cook; Federal funding: NIH, NSF; Vice-President of ERAS USA. E.L.S., A.C.P., K.A., S.A., A.M.S., M.M.T., K.E.D., I.J.S., F.L., M.G.D., C.S. have no conflicts of interest. Correspondence: Katharine L. McGinigle, MD, MPH, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3022 Burnett-Womack Bldg, CB 7212, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 (e-mail: katharine_mcginigle@med.unc.edu). Independent peer review and oversight have been provided by the members of the Society for Vascular Surgery Document Oversight Committee (Ruth Bush, chair, Marc Schermerhorn, vice-chair, Keith Calligaro, Mohammad Eslami, Raul Guzman, Ahmed Kayssi, Chris Kwolek, Gregory Landry, Erika Mitchell, Patrick Muck, William Robinson, Jeannie Ruddy, Evan Ryer, Palma Shaw, Chris Smolock, Britt Tonnessen, Brant Ullery, Chandu Vemuri, Greg Westin, and Karen Woo). 0741-5214 Copyright  2022 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the Society for Vascular Surgery. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2022.01.131 1796 2a. Anemia screening ................................................... 1799 2b. Nutritional deficiency .......................................... 1799 2c. Frailty ................................................................................. 1799 2d. Delirium risk ................................................................ 1802 2e. Tobacco and alcohol cessation ................... 1802 2f. Medical risk ................................................................... 1803 2f-i. Cardiovascular risk .......................................... 1803 2f-ii. Renal risk .............................................................. 1804 3. Preoperative exercise therapy and prehabilitation ........................................................................... 1804 4. Perioperative anticoagulation strategy or plan .................................................................................................... 1804 PREOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ........................ 1805 5. Fasting ........................................................................................ 1805 6. Carbohydrate loading ................................................... 1805 7. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis ......... 1805 8. Preanesthetic sedative and analgesia medication ................................................................................... 1806 9. Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin preparation .................................................................................. 1806 10. Prevention of nausea and vomiting ................ 1806 INTRAOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ................... 1807 11. Standard anesthetic protocol ................................ 1807 11a. Neuromuscular blocking agents and monitoring ............................................................................ 1807 11b. Cardiovascular monitoring ............................. 1807 11c. Renal protection ..................................................... 1808 11c-i. Ischemic preconditioning ...................... 1808 11c-ii. Renal protective medications ............ 1808 11d. Cell salvage ................................................................. 1808 11e. Lung protective ventilation ............................ 1808 11f. Epidural analgesia .................................................. 1809 12. Body temperature management ...................... 1809 13. Drainage of surgical site strategy ....................... 1809 POSTOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS ..................... 1809 14. Multimodal analgesia and opioid reduction ....................................................................................... 1809 15. Nasogastric drainage ................................................... 1810 16. Oral feeding ......................................................................... 1810 17. Fluid therapy ....................................................................... 1810 18. Urinary drainage .............................................................. 1810 19. Glycemic control ............................................................. 1811 20. Early mobilization ......................................................... 1811 21. Discharge education .................................................... 1811 22. Audit of outcomes ........................................................ 1812 CARE ELEMENTS WITH CONFLICTING OR INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A RECOMMENDATION . 1812 Preoperative medical risk assessment .................. 1812 Skin preparation ...................................................................... 1812 Intraoperative fluid therapy ........................................... 1813 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ....................................... 1813 DISCLAIMER The Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS) develops evidenced-based documents as a resource to assist members in the practice of vascular surgery. The recommendations contained herein are based on a recent review of published evidence and expert opinion. They reflect the available body of evidence, and their applicability reflects the limitations of those data and are subject to reassessment and revision as new knowledge emerges. Given these limitations, consensus documents do not represent a statement of the standard of care, nor do they substitute for clinician judgment or supplant patient preference or shared decisionmaking. The Society for Vascular Surgery recognizes that departure from these recommendations could be warranted when, in the reasonable judgment of the treating clinician, such a course of action is indicated by the clinical presentation of the patient, limitations of available resources, advances in knowledge or technology, or patient preference. The reader must rely solely on their own judgment to determine which practices and procedures, whether included in this document or not, are appropriate for them, their patient, their institution, or their practice. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) pathways have been shown to be beneficial for many surgical specialties.1 The concept of multidisciplinary care to control postoperative physiology and maintain homeostasis to attenuate stress and accelerate convalescence was first described in 1997.2 Soon thereafter, the perioperative enhanced recovery after surgery study group was formed in Europe, and their first consensus statement for perioperative care to enhance recovery after colorectal surgery was published.3 The group formed the ERAS Society in 2010. Its mission has since spread to six continents, and 19 surgical specialties have published formal ERAS Society guidelines or consensus statements (available at: www.erassociety.org). Although each specialty and geographic region might be unique, the common foundational theme across all ERAS guidelines and consensus statements is to create a culture in which all perioperative caregivers, including anesthesiologists, surgeons, nurses, and therapists work together within a clinical pathway to apply evidence-based practice in unison. In addition to these recommendations, auditing systems with data points corresponding to each ERAS element are supported by the ERAS Society, allowing those who choose to participate a method to monitor the fidelity of their enhanced recovery programs. Compared with the general population, vascular surgery patients are more likely to present with specific perioperative challenges owing to age, frailty, and multiple comorbidities and the highly invasive operations that are sometimes required for limb or life preservation. This combination of factors results in complex management strategies, increased usage of health care resources, prolonged hospitalization stays, and increased rehabilitation needs. ERAS, with its aim of delivering high-quality perioperative care and accelerating recovery, appears well suited to address the needs of patients undergoing open aortic operations. The present Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1797 Volume 75, Number 6 consensus statement focused on both transabdominal and retroperitoneal approaches (including supraceliac, suprarenal, and infrarenal clamp sites) for aortic aneurysm and aortoiliac occlusive disease operations. METHODS Formation of the guideline development group and selection of guideline topics. In collaboration, the SVS and the ERAS Society initiated the formation of the multidisciplinary, international guideline development group (GDG) comprising vascular surgeons, anesthesiologists, and advanced practice providers with expertise in ERAS and vascular pathophysiology. Guideline topic selection was performed according to the recommendations for the development of clinical guidelines within the ERAS Society framework.4 The GDG was consulted for advice on the appropriate items to be included in the guideline, with the final decision made by the lead authors (K.L.M. and H.D.B.). The guideline items were allocated to the authors for literature summary and grading, depending on each individual・s expertise. The final content was agreed on by all the authors. Literature search strategy. A third-party team of investigators and a reference librarian specializing in literature reviews assisted the GDG in identifying and categorizing the existing effectiveness and comparative effectiveness literature on ERAS protocols relevant to vascular surgery. The librarian executed and documented the search in July 2019. The databases queried included PubMed, CINAHL, and ClinicalTrials.gov. Systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and observational cohort studies reporting on adults (age $18 years) undergoing aortic surgery and reporting on any one or combinations of the ERAS guideline items were included. Many items had not been studied for open aortic surgery patients; thus, for elements that could be reasonably applied to all types of surgical patients, the reported data and ERAS guidelines from other surgical specialties were included. In some cases, the data from aortic and other patient populations were insufficient, or the existing data could not be reasonably extrapolated. Thus, no recommendations were made. The GDG members then searched reference lists and also repeated literature searches to include any new publications up to and including April 2021. The final included studies were carefully reviewed by the GDG, and any disagreements were resolved through group consensus via the Delphi method. Quality assessment, data analyses and consensus generation. The GRADE (grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation) system was used to evaluate the quality of evidence and recommendations for each of the ERAS topics.5,6 Recommendations were made according to whether the quality of evidence was high, moderate, low, or very low. Conclusions based on high-quality evidence are unlikely to change with further investigation. Those based on moderate-quality evidence are more likely to be affected by future research. Finally, those based on low-quality evidence are the least supported, might not include prospective study designs, and are the most likely change in the future if more rigorous research is performed. In the case of recommendations made solely from literature of nonaortic cohorts, the quality of evidence was downgraded. The strength of the recommendation was based on the balance between the desirable and undesirable effects of the recommendation. A strong recommendation for an ERAS item is possible even with a low quality of evidence, if the risk of harm is negligible. RESULTS The literature search yielded 3460 citations. Of these 3460 citations, 109 studies had addressed enhanced recovery interventions, as either individual core elements or combinations of elements, for vascular surgery patients. Another 18 studies had included mixed cohorts, including vascular surgery patients. In addition, 463 studies were identified that had not included vascular surgery patients but that might have been applicable to patients undergoing open aortic operations. A total of 590 of these abstracts were screened. After discussions and reviews, no disagreements were found between the authors in the assessment of the quality of evidence and grading of the included reports. Structured around the ERAS core elements, 36 recommendations were made and organized into preadmission, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative recommendations (Table; Fig).7 For some of the ERAS elements, insufficient data were found to support a recommendation; however, summary statements based on expert opinion were provided. PREADMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS 1. Patient information, education, and counseling Preoperative education and counseling are essential to engage patients and caregivers in the perioperative process. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis showed that two thirds of studies (two RCTs and five observational studies) of different enhanced recovery programs for open aortic surgeries had used some form of patient education, although education had not been studied as a specific intervention.8 A retrospective study showed effectiveness in enhanced recovery after open abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair through counseling before and during hospitalization regarding nutrition, early rehabilitation, and setting expectations and daily goals.9 Preoperative education can be provided using various methods, such as illustrated booklets,10 in addition to written informed consent, surgeon patient discussion,11 and 1798 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 multidisciplinary education with surgery and anesthesia services.12 Counseling of patients and families regarding early mobilization10,11 and discharge criteria13 are essential to achieve length of stay (LOS) reductions. Studies, including an RCT, from other surgical specialties have shown that extended pre- and postoperative counseling, guidance by an ERAS nurse, and written information will lead to less pain, decreased nausea and vomiting, reduced hospital LOS, and increased enhanced recovery pathway adherence.14-16 Recommendation: Patients should receive dedicated verbal and written preoperative education and counseling. Quality of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 2. Preadmission screening, assessment, and optimization (a, anemia screening; b, nutritional deficiency; c, frailty; d, delirium risk; e, tobacco and alcohol overconsumption; f, medical risk) Delivery of optimal care in aneurysm disease requires balancing the operative risk relative to the likelihood of survival in the perioperative period and beyond. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs and observational studies found that only 3 of 12 studies of ERAS-like pathways in aortic surgery had had any medical screening and preoperative optimization documented.8,9,11,17 Patients should undergo a thorough preoperative assessment and optimization across a breadth of risk factors for aortic surgery, as detailed in the next sections. 2a. Anemia screening. Anemia is associated with poor outcomes after surgery.18,19 Although a preoperative blood transfusion will corrects anemia rapidly and can be used for severely anemic patients and/or patients undergoing surgery with expected profound blood loss, caution should be used because transfusions have been associated with increased mortality and morbidity.20,21 Medical management of preoperative anemia requires time and should be planned $3 to 4 weeks before elective surgery. However, aortic surgery-specific evidence has remained lacking. Extrapolated from other specialties, iron (oral and intravenous), folate, and vitamin B12 supplements might reduce the need for blood transfusions but did not affect the incidence of adverse events or mortality.22-27 In colorectal ERAS pathways, iron supplementation has been recommended.28 However, the balance of trial evidence in mixed surgical populations has not shown clinically significant reductions in the need for allogeneic blood transfusions for patients receiving preoperative iron therapy.29,30 Caution is advised in translating certain anemia therapies to open aortic operations amid the presence of U.S. Food and Drug Administration limitations on the use of erythropoietin-stimulating agents for patients undergoing cardiac or vascular surgery and an adverse event profile that includes thrombotic events.31 Recommendation: The cause of preoperative anemia should be evaluated and treated. Quality of evidence: D (very low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 2 (weak) 2b. Nutritional deficiency. Preoperative nutritional deficiency can be established by screening and, as needed, assessed using a combination of clinical and biochemical parameters. Several assessment tools are available to assist in this regard, including Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool, Nutritional Risk Screening 2002, Mini Nutritional Assessment, Short Nutritional Assessment Questionnaire, Malnutrition Screening Tool, and Subjective Global Assessment.32-34 In a single-site retrospective study of open AAA repairs, a moderate risk of malnutrition determined from Controlling Nutritional Status scores (derived from serum albumin, cholesterol levels, and lymphocyte counts in peripheral blood) was associated with mid-term mortality and lifethreatening complications.35 If the screening results indicate risk, a nutritional assessment should be performed if expertise is available and appropriate nutritional care delivered.36,37 Oral nutritional supplements, including those containing immunonutrients,38-40 should almost always be preferred to enteral or parenteral nutrition regimens.37 Regimens for correcting malnutrition via oral nutritional supplementation have shown the greatest effect if started $7 to 10 days preoperatively in nonvascular cohorts.32,41-43 Recommendation: Screening should be performed for malnutrition and nutritional deficiencies corrected, preferably with oral regimens. Quality of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 2c. Frailty. Frailty is a syndrome defined as increased vulnerability because of a physiologic decline in reserve and function and consists of physical, functional, social, nutritional, and cognitive domains. For aortic aneurysm patients, frailty has been associated with increased adverse outcomes at 30 days (ie, morbidity, mortality, failure to rescue) and an increased LOS.44,45 Preoperative frailty is associated with increased discharge to nonehome destination, a loss of independence after major vascular surgery, and decreased long-term survival.46-48 Often used scales to measure frailty include the Clinical Frailty Scale, modified Frailty index, and the Risk Analysis Index. The use of standardized frailty assessments for aneurysm patients more than doubles the pool of the at-risk or frail patients identified for preoperative optimization.49 Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1799 Volume 75, Number 6 Table. Recommendations and GRADE (grading of recommendations, assessment, development, evaluation) for each Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) element ERAS element Recommendation GRADE Evidence level Preadmission 1. Patient information, education, counseling Patients should receive dedicated verbal and written preoperative education and counseling (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 2a. Screening, assessment, and optimization: anemia screening Evaluate the cause of and treat chronic preoperative anemia (grade 2D) Weak Very lowa 2b. Screening, assessment, and optimization: nutritional deficiency Screen for malnutrition and correct nutritional deficiency, preferably with oral regimens (grade 1B) Strong Moderatea 2c. Screening, assessment, and optimization: frailty Frailty screening is recommended as a routine part of preoperative patient assessment (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 2d. Screening, assessment, and optimization: delirium risk Screen for delirium risk and implement preoperative practices to minimize onset of delirium as a routine part of practice (grade 1C) Strong Low 2e. Screening, assessment, and optimization: tobacco and alcohol i. Prescribe smoking cessation therapy and recommend a minimum of 4 weeks smoking cessation before surgery (grade 1A) Strong Higha ii. Recommend alcohol cessation 4 weeks before surgery, particularly for patients who consume more than five alcohol equivalents or 15 alcohol units per day (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 2f. Screening, assessment, and optimization: medical risk i. Cardiac risk should be evaluated and optimized with antiplatelet therapy, statins, antihypertensive therapy, and diabetes control before elective surgery (grade 1A) Strong High ii. Risk of acute kidney injury should be evaluated and optimized before elective surgery (grade 1A) Strong High 3. Preoperative exercise therapy and prehabilitation Recommend 6 weeks of supervised exercise therapy before elective surgery (grade 2C) Weak Low 4. Perioperative antiplatelet or anticoagulation plan i. Continue aspirin throughout the perioperative period (grade 1A) Strong High ii. Stop secondary antiplatelet medications and anticoagulant agents before surgery, except for select patient populations (grade 1B) Strong Moderate Preoperative 5. Fasting Avoid overnight fasting; encourage clear fluids for #2 hours and light foods for #6 hours before the induction of general anesthesia (grade 1A) Strong Higha 6. Carbohydrate loading Patients without diabetes should receive a preoperative carbohydrate drink (grade 2B) Weak Moderatea 7. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis Routinely use calf-length intermittent compression devices combined with either low-dose unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin starting immediately before surgery and continuing at least throughout the hospitalization (grade 1B) Strong Moderatea 8. Preanesthetic sedative and analgesia medication i. Do not routinely use sedatives to reduce anxiety preoperatively (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 1800 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 Table. Continued. ERAS element Recommendation GRADE Evidence level ii. Routinely use preoperative administration of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part of a multimodal opioid-sparing analgesia strategy (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 9. Antimicrobial agents Prophylactic intravenous antibiotic dosing should begin 30-60 minutes preoperatively, with redosing intraoperatively within two serum half-lives of the antimicrobial agent used or with substantive intraoperative blood loss, and extending no more than 24 hours postoperatively (grade 1A) Strong High 10. Prevention of nausea and vomiting Perform a risk assessment for PONV, routinely use multimodal PONV prophylaxis based on the assessment findings, and use PONV rescue with a different class of antiemetic (grade 1A) Strong Higha Intraoperative 11a. Anesthetic protocol: neuromuscular blocking agents and monitoring Neuromuscular monitoring should be used to ensure adequate intraoperative muscle relaxation and full reversal of neuromuscular blockade before extubation (grade 1A) Strong Higha 11b. Anesthetic protocol: cardiovascular monitoring Invasive cardiovascular monitoring with an arterial catheter is essential; the MAP should be maintained to near baseline values and at or >65 mm Hg (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 11c. Anesthetic protocol: renal protection Adjunctive renal protective medications and methods of ischemic preconditioning of any type can cause harm and should not be used for infrarenal repairs (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 11d. Anesthetic protocol: cell salvage Use cell salvage (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 11e. Anesthetic protocol: lung-protective ventilation Use lung protective strategies (grade 2C) Weak Lowa 11f. Epidural analgesia Mid-thoracic (T6-T9) epidural analgesia should be used intraoperatively and continued postoperatively as an infusion or patient-controlled analgesia using a combination of a local anesthetic and an opioid (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 12. Body temperature management Use multiple strategies to maintain normothermia, including prewarming and active warming of patients intraoperatively (grade 1B) Strong Moderatea 13. Drainage of surgical site Do not routinely use drains in the surgical wound (grade 2C) Weak Low Postoperative 14. Multimodal analgesia and opioid reduction strategies Routinely use multimodal analgesic regimens to improve pain control and reduce opioid consumption (grade 1B) Strong Moderatea 15. Nasogastric drainage Avoid the routine use of postoperative nasogastric tubes (grade 1A) Strong Higha 16. Oral feeding An early return to a normal diet and oral nutritional supplements should be promoted (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 17. Fluid therapy If intravenous fluids are indicated, restrict postoperative fluid therapy to 1.5 L/d (grade 1B) Strong Moderate 18. Urinary drainage Early removal of urinary drainage catheters is recommended (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 19. Glycemic control Maintain glycemic control, with attention to avoiding hypoglycemia (grade 1B) Strong Moderate (Continued on next page) Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1801 Volume 75, Number 6 Based on the consensus of best practices from the Society for Perioperative Assessment and Quality Improvement, a patient who has a positive frailty screening result should be followed up with a diagnostic assessment of frailty, and, when feasible, a comprehensive geriatric assessment with a tailored intervention (shared decision-making or prehabilitation) should be performed, ideally by a geriatric specialist.50 Specifically, a small RCT testing an outpatient comprehensive geriatric assessment and optimization program for elderly patients scheduled for elective vascular surgery was associated with reduced complications, shorter LOSs, and a lower rate of patients discharged to a higher level of care dependency.51 Recommendation: Frailty screening is recommended as a routine part of preoperative patient assessments. Quality of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 2d. Delirium risk. Delirium can contribute to adverse events, prolonged hospital LOSs, nonehome discharge destinations, and mortality following surgery.52 Those with a medical history of delirium, advancing age by decade, and American Society of Anesthesiologists score of $3 were at the highest risk of delirium in a prospective cohort of patients undergoing surgery for AAAs and colorectal cancer.52 A subsequent cohort study of the same patient population additionally showed renal impairment, cognitive impairment, active smoking, intensive care unit admission, and blood transfusion were associated with an increased risk of postoperative delirium, but prehabilitation program participation was protective.53,54 Preoperative identification of cognitive risk using standardized cognitive scales such as the mini-mental state examination can also allow engagement of patients and/or families to discuss the implications of proposed surgery (capacity to consent and risk of postoperative complications, including delirium) and the long-term effects of cognitive impairment.51,55 Recommendation: Patients should undergo screening for delirium risk and preoperative practices to minimize the onset of delirium should be implemented as a routine part of practice. Quality of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 2e. Tobacco and alcohol cessation. The SVS practice guidelines for AAAs recommend smoking cessation for $2 weeks before aneurysm repair,56 although the supporting literature is limited. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 25 studies (2 RCTs, 7 prospective cohort studies, and 16 retrospective studies), including >20,000 cardiac and noncardiac surgical patients, a 23% and 47% reduction was found in the incidence of respiratory complications for patients who had stopped smoking for 4 and 8 weeks before surgery, respectively.57 Another meta-analysis of four RCTs demonstrated that smoking cessation interventions reduced surgical site infections (SSIs), and pooled data from 140 cohort studies supported the finding that 1 month of smoking cessation was associated with improved postoperative outcomes.57-59 In the perioperative period, nicotine replacement therapy and smoking cessation medications have proved efficacious for smoking cessation.60 Recommendation: Smoking cessation therapy should be prescribed and a minimum of 4 weeks smoking cessation before surgery recommended. Quality of evidence: A (high) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) In a Cochrane review of two RCTs comprising 69 surgical patients, overall postoperative morbidity was increased by two- to threefold for patients who had abused alcohol. One month of preoperative abstinence significantly improved the outcomes for a group who Table. Continued. ERAS element Recommendation GRADE Evidence level 20. Early mobilization strategy Use a formal plan for early mobilization, with early physical therapy involvement when needed (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 21. Discharge education Use both written and verbal discharge education and follow-up telephone calls within 24-48 hours of hospital discharge and arrange clinic follow-up visits with both the surgeon and the primary care physician at least once by 30 days postoperatively (grade 1C) Strong Lowa 22. Audit of outcomes Routine auditing of ERAS care processes and feedback to all staff involved are necessary (grade 1C) Strong Lowa MAP, Mean arterial pressure; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PONV, postoperative nausea and vomiting. aSome of the evidence used to make the recommendation was extrapolated from nonaortic patient cohorts. 1802 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 had imbibed at least five alcohol equivalents (or 15 units) per day.61 Another meta-analysis of multiple RCTs in mixed surgical cohorts showed that drinking more than one alcohol equivalent (or two units) per day increased the risk of non-SSI but did not increase postoperative mortality.62 Recommendation: Alcohol cessation should be recommended for 4 weeks before surgery, especially for patients who consume more than five alcohol equivalents or 15 alcohol units per day. Quality of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 2f. Medical risk. Delivering optimal care in aortic disease requires balancing the operative risk relative to the likelihood of survival in the perioperative period and beyond. Patients with AAA are known to experience higher rates of heart attack, stroke, major amputation, and 5-year mortality compared with agematched controls.63 Patients should undergo a thorough preoperative assessment and optimization across a breadth of risk factors for aortic surgery as detailed in the guidelines for perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery.64 Risk scores can be used to quantify the overall risk of open aortic surgery and/or specific risk to a single physiologic system; multiple validated risk calculators are available.65-67 The SVS Clinical Practice Guidelines for AAA suggest ：informing patients contemplating open repair or endovascular AAA repair of the VQI [Vascular Quality Initiative] perioperative mortality risk score.； 56 The Vascular Quality Initiative mortality risk model predicts for mortality well (C ? 0.802).68 However, the model discrimination for predicting for postoperative myocardial infarction after open aortic surgery was only 0.68.67 Predicting the risk to a single organ system is less accurate with the available tools, which are not universally recommended.69 2f-i. Cardiovascular risk. Based onmultiple high-quality RCTs of cardiovascular disease prevention, it is recommended that all patients with aneurysmal disease and aortoiliac occlusive disease should be offered antiplatelet therapy, statins (even if the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level is 1600 patients undergoing vascular surgery, aspirin reduces the incidence of adverse cardiovascular events and mortality among patients with coronary artery disease and should be continued during the perioperative period.96-98 Often, patients with coexistent coronary and aortic disease will be receiving dual antiplatelet therapy, and the 2016 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend avoiding discontinuation of the second agent within 1 month after bare metal stent placement and 6 months after drugeluting coronary stent placement, although the risk of stent thrombosis must be weighed against the risk of delaying aortic surgery on a case-specific basis.98 These guidelines were determined by from multiple large observational studies of mixed surgical populations evaluating the timeframe for an increased risk of coronary stent thrombosis.99-102 Practical recommendations for standardizing the perioperative management of antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy for patients with coronary stents who require vascular surgery have been developed.103 When feasible, any antiplatelet medication, other than aspirin, should be stopped 7 days before surgery to reduce the risk of regional anesthesia techniques, including epidural placement, and can be resumed 6 hours after block performance or epidural catheter removal.104,105 Both warfarin and nonevitamin K 1804 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 antagonist oral anticoagulants should be discontinued $5 days and 2 days in advance of surgery, respectively, to allow for regional anesthetic techniques and to reduce the risk of intraoperative bleeding.106 The need for low-molecular-weight heparin as a bridge should be determined by the indication for anticoagulation.106 Recommendation: Aspirin should be continued throughout the perioperative period. Level of evidence: A (high) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) Recommendation: Secondary antiplatelet medications and anticoagulant agents should be stopped before surgery, except for select patient populations. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) PREOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS 5. Fasting. Modern preoperative fasting guidelines have been a part of many enhanced recovery bundles studied in open aortic surgery, and limited fasting is feasible.8 Based on a meta-analysis of multiple RCTs that included a range of surgical patients and according to both the American Society of Anesthesiologists・ and European Society of Anesthesiology・s preoperative fasting guidelines, which give strong recommendations based on high-quality evidence, patients should be allowed to drink clear fluids for #2 hours before elective surgery but should not eat any solid food for $6 hours for ：light meals； or 8 hours for fatty foods and meat.107,108 However, it is important to note that these recommendations only apply to patients who will undergo elective procedures, and a longer fasting period might be necessary for patients with delayed gastric emptying. Recommendation: Patients should avoid overnight fasting and should be encouraged to drink clear fluids for #2 hours and light foods #6 hours before the induction of general anesthesia. Level of evidence: A (high) Recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 6. Carbohydrate loading. No RCTs have specifically examined the role of oral carbohydrate loading for patients undergoing open aortic surgery; however, this practice was included as a part of a bundle of care in two ：fast-track； aortic surgery publications.8,9,11 Extrapolated from other specialties, the most commonly studied regimen has been 800 mL of a clear 12.5% carbohydrate drink the evening before surgery and 400 mL #2 hours before surgery.109,110 Several RCTs of preoperative oral carbohydrate drinks reported that their use can reduce postoperative insulin resistance and result in less perioperative hyperglycemia compared with either placebo or fasting after midnight.111-113 Other RCTs of variable size and quality have demonstrated that carbohydrate administration can modulate postoperative metabolic and inflammatory responses, decrease protein breakdown, and better preserve patients・ lean body mass and muscle strength compared with preoperative fasting.114 Several medium-size RCTs of coronary artery bypass surgery have demonstrated that the consumption of preoperative carbohydrates can reduce the incidence of myocardial injury, the intensive care unit LOS, and the need for vasoactive drug administration.115-117 A systematic review of 22 RCTs found that oral carbohydrate loading is safe for #2 hours before surgery and can improve postoperative discomfort.118 A Cochrane review of 27 RCTs of variable quality in mixed surgical populations concluded that preoperative carbohydrate loading reduces the hospital LOS, especially after major operations.119 Because many patients undergoing vascular surgery will have diabetes, the question of effectiveness and safety has been raised. Despite the low-quality evidence, it appears that oral carbohydrates are safe and effective in patients with diabetes.120,121 However, no recommendations can be made for patients with diabetes. Recommendation: Patients without diabetes should receive a preoperative carbohydrate drink. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 2 (weak) 7. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis. Based on two RCTs, multiple prospective cohort studies of >1500 patients combined, and a retrospective analysis of registry data, the incidence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) after open aortic surgery has been high, even among patients receiving perioperative chemoprophylaxis.122-128 Within the initial hospitalization, the rate of DVT diagnosed with screening venous duplex ultrasound has ranged from 7.5% to 18% and might be as great as 37% within the 30-day postoperative period.123 Specific to open aortic surgery, one RCT of 100 patients compared unfractionated heparin of 5000 U twice daily and calflength intermittent mechanical compression to no DVT prophylaxis.128 They found no differences in the rate of DVT or pulmonary embolism and reported no bleeding events.128 Another RCT of 224 patients compared the effectiveness of unfractionated heparin to lowmolecular-weight heparin and found a high rate of DVT (7.5% within 10 days) but no differences in effectiveness between the treatment groups.122 Three patients (1%) had developed a wound hematoma requiring exploration; however, no major bleeding events were reported.122 Although aortic surgery is considered high risk for the development of venous thromboembolism (VTE),129,130 most of the literature supporting specific pharmacomechanical thromboprophylaxis regimens have been from mixed surgical populations.123,129 Compiling data from >100 RCTs of mixed abdominal surgery populations Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1805 Volume 75, Number 6 comparing low-dose unfractionated heparin, lowmolecular-weight heparin, and no chemoprophylaxis, the American College of Chest Physicians guidelines on the prevention of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients noted a significant reduction in VTE when prophylactic doses of either of these anticoagulant agents are used and that bleeding complications are rare.129 On a case by case basis, if the consequences of bleeding are thought to be particularly severe, mechanical prophylaxis should be used until the risk abates and chemoprophylaxis can be initiated postoperatively. If epidural or other neuraxial anesthesia is planned, it should be placed before the administration of the preoperative dose of venous thromboembolism chemoprophylaxis.104,105 Chemoprophylaxis is safe throughout the hospitalization when the epidural is in place but must be held before epidural removal. Recommendation: Calf-length intermittent compression devices combined with either low-dose unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin starting immediately before surgery should be used routinely and continued at least throughout the hospitalization. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 8. Preanesthetic sedative and analgesia medication. Preoperative anxiety is frequent and can lead to increased perioperative analgesic requirements. Multiple prospective and retrospective cohort studies have demonstrated benzodiazepines can cause neurocognitive impairment and have unwanted sedative effects.131-134 Therefore, sedative or anxiolytic drugs should be avoided. This is especially important for patients aged >65 years because the American Geriatric Society has made a strong recommendation, with moderate evidence, against the use of benzodiazepines for older adults.132 Preanesthetic analgesia administered orally on the day of surgery has generally been accepted as a part of a multimodal opioid-sparing perioperative analgesia strategy. The most frequently used drugs include acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and gabapentinoids, all of which have been shown to decrease postoperative pain scores, facilitate opioid-sparing pain management, and can be administered cost-effectively.134,135 However, although rare, the use of gabapentinoids was associated with serious respiratory depression, which was amplified when used in combination with opioid or other sedative drugs.136,137 Caution should be taken in the dosing of NSAIDs and gabapentinoids in the vascular population, with adjustments determined by patient age and renal function. Consideration of NSAID-related bleeding risk is also important. However, no studies have been performed of aortic surgery to classify the risk for bleeding in the setting of low-dose NSAIDS used for a short duration in the perioperative period.138 Two of the reported enhanced recovery programs for aortic surgery included routine administration of NSAIDs but did not report adverse events.9,11 Acknowledging the potential complications that can result from poor pain control or the overuse of opioids, it seems imprudent to exclude NSAIDs from perioperative use for all patients undergoing aortic surgery. No RCTs could be found in the literature of preanesthetic analgesia in open aortic surgery; however, many other surgical specialties have made strong recommendations, with low to moderate evidence, for the use of multimodal, opioid-sparing analgesia. Recommendation: Sedatives should not be routinely used to reduce patient anxiety preoperatively. Quality of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) Recommendation: Preoperative administration of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids should be routinely used a as part of a multimodal opioid-sparing analgesia strategy. Quality of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 9. Antimicrobial prophylaxis and skin preparation. Preoperative intravenous prophylactic antibiotics should be administered immediately before (within 30-60 minutes before) open aortic aneurysm repair, with prophylactic antibiotics continued for not >24 hours postoperatively based on a meta-analysis of RCTs.56,139,140 A meta-analysis of RCTs of antibiotic regimens and dosing did not demonstrate a significantly greater reduction in wound infection among comparable regimens of first- or second-generation cephalosporins, penicillin/b-lactamase inhibitors, aminoglycosides, or the glycopeptide agents vancomycin or teicoplanin.139 Extrapolated from cardiac and spine surgery, the intraoperative antibiotic should be redosed within two serum half-lives of the agent141-143 and can be additionally recommended for substantive procedural blood loss.144 Recommendation: Prophylactic intravenous antibiotic dosing should begin 30 to 60 minutes preoperatively, with redosing intraoperatively within two serum halflives of the antimicrobial agent used or with substantive intraoperative blood loss and extending no more than 24 hours postoperatively. Quality of evidence: A (high) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 10. Prevention of nausea and vomiting. The prevention and treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is an important component of perioperative care and one of the most common adverse events. The incidence of nausea and vomiting has been estimated to be 50% and 30% in the general surgical population, respectively, and might approach 80% for patients with 1806 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 a high risk of PONV.145 The risk factors for PONV include female sex, younger age, a history of PONV or motion sickness, nonsmoking, general (volatile) anesthesia, the use of postoperative opioids, and the duration of anesthesia.146 The most commonly used PONV risk scoring systems are the scores by Apfel et al147 and Koivuranta et al.148 It is important to use PONV mitigation strategies such as minimizing the use of nitrous oxide and volatile anesthetics,149 using regional anesthesia such as peripheral nerve blocks and neuraxial anesthesia,150 and including opioid-sparing, multimodal analgesia techniques.151,152 Significant high-quality evidence is available from multiple RCTs supporting the use of multimodal prophylaxis and treatment of PONV that can be generalized to major vascular surgery.153 Pharmacologic agent classes and other interventions available at present include 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, corticosteroids, antihistamines, dopamine antagonists, propofol anesthesia, natural killer-1 receptor antagonists, anticholinergics, and acupuncture.154 For rescue treatment, one should use an antiemetic from a different class than had been used for prophylaxis. Recommendation: A risk assessment for PONV should be performed, multimodal PONV prophylaxis according to the findings from the assessment should be routinely used, and a PONV rescue should use a different class of antiemetic. Quality of evidence: A (high) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) INTRAOPERATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS 11. Standard anesthetic protocol Patients undergoing open aortic repair will have a high prevalence of comorbidities that predispose them to higher rates of postoperative complications and delayed recovery from surgery. The key components and aims of a standard anesthetic protocol are to use short-acting anesthetic agents and lung-protective ventilation and to achieve complete reversal of neuromuscular blockade as defined by appropriate monitoring. This allows for reversal for the patient with minimal side effects and facilitates early mobilization and feeding. A standardized multimodal anesthetic protocol should be considered in the aim to minimize the effects of anesthesia and surgery in open aortic repair and enhance recovery. 11a. Neuromuscular blocking agents and monitoring. Based on analyses of registries and other retrospective studies that have demonstrated similar results over the decades, the use of neuromuscular blocking agents should be monitored with quantitative methods (eg, acceleromyography) to ensure adequate intraoperative muscle relaxation and to prevent the delayed return of full neuromuscular function at the end of surgery. Approximately 5% of patients will experience a major pulmonary complication after noncardiac surgery, and inadequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade increases the risk of postoperative pulmonary complications.155-158 A matched cohort analysis found that selective relaxant binding agents provide a rapid and complete reversal of common steroidal neuromuscular blocking agents without adverse effects found with other drugs.158 The benefits of these new agents of neuromuscular blockade reversal include fewer pulmonary complications, reduced LOS, and reduction in 30-day unplanned readmission after major abdominal surgery.159,160 Recommendation: Neuromuscular monitoring should be used to ensure adequate intraoperative muscle relaxation and full reversal of neuromuscular blockade before extubation. Quality of evidence: A (high) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 11b. Cardiovascular monitoring. Open aortic surgery has been associated with swings in hemodynamics owing to the potential for blood loss and cross-clamping and unclamping the aorta in a surgical cohort, also known to have a high prevalence of occult cardiovascular disease. Many of the changes in blood pressure and cardiovascular tone occurring during aortic surgery are well described and should be anticipated. Invasive arterial and central venous monitoring, coupled with noninvasive cardiac output monitoring, are useful in mitigating labile hemodynamics.161,162 The use of transesophageal echocardiography has been well described in noncardiac surgery, in particular, its utility in the assessment of intraoperative volume status, ventricular function, and regional wall motion abnormalities.163,164 These capabilities are likely to provide useful clinical information when considering the most appropriate intraoperative hemodynamic intervention at any given time; however, the specific use of transesophageal echocardiography in open aortic operations has not been studied in depth nor has any clinical outcome benefit ever been described. No evidence has shown that pulmonary artery catheters are of benefit in aortic surgery.161,162,165 Changes in mean arterial pressure, cardiac output, and heart rate associated with clamping and unclamping of the aorta make maintaining hemodynamics and intraoperative fluid therapy much more challenging in aortic cases compared with other major abdominal operations. The judicious use of vasodilators could be necessary in those with cross-clamping above the renal arteries; however, increasing the depth of anesthesia for a period after clamping will often be all that is necessary for uncomplicated cases. It is ideal to maintain the baseline blood pressure during cross-clamping to maximize collateral flow to the distal tissues. The strategies to be considered before the release of the cross-clamp include, but are not limited to, increasing the minute ventilation, reducing Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1807 Volume 75, Number 6 the depth of anesthesia, titrating up the doses of the vasopressor or inotrope, volume loading, and sequential release of the iliac clamps. An association exists between myocardial injury during noncardiac surgery and the intraoperative mean arterial pressure (MAP). Even relatively short periods of a low MAP have been associated with a significantly increased risk of myocardial injury.166 In a prospective cohort study of vascular surgery, a 40% MAP reduction from baseline for #30 minutes was shown to be a significant risk.167 A large retrospective cohort study (n ? 57,315) reported that although relative reductions in blood pressure were a useful measure, any decrease in MAP 65 mm Hg. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 11c. Renal protection. 11c-i. Ischemic preconditioning. Much interest has ensued in the use of specific techniques to reduce organ failure or impairment after aortic surgery. One such example is ischemic preconditioning; however, this might actually cause harm.169 A meta-analysis of nine trials of aortic surgery with 599 patients, of whom 336 had undergone open repair, concluded again that no benefit of renal ischemic preconditioning has been reported regarding mortality, kidney injury requiring renal support, and myocardial infarction.170 11c-ii. Renal protective medications. Two small RCTs of AAA patients and a meta-analysis of five small RCTs of other major cardiac and abdominal surgery have been conducted to evaluate the use of low-dose dopamine and fenoldopam on renal function in different clinical contexts. However, it appears that neither offers an advantage to euvolemic patients after elective abdominal aortic surgery.171-173 The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes committee advised against the use of fenoldopam in 2012.174 Similarly, RCTs have not demonstrated any clinical reductions in the incidence of renal failure with the use of mannitol.175 A retrospective analysis of a single-center cohort of 169 patients who had undergone suprarenal clamping during AAA repair noted a renal protective effect for 0.5 g/kg mannitol given before clamping.176 However, a small retrospective series from the Vascular Quality Initiative registry did not note any differences in renal outcomes when stratified by mannitol administration.177 Recommendation: Adjunctive renal protective medications and the methods of ischemic preconditioning of any type can cause harm and should not be used for infrarenal repairs. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 11d. Cell salvage. The use of blood conservation strategies and, in particular, cell salvage is an established part of clinical practice and was reported in a meta-analysis of four RCTs with 292 patients to be associated with a reduced LOS in critical care, overall hospital LOS, and the use of allogeneic red blood cell transfusion, specifically for patients undergoing open AAA repair.178,179 Citing these same studies, the Association of Anesthetists 2018 guidelines supported the routine use of red blood cell salvage during open AAA surgery and any surgery in adults if the blood loss could be expected to exceed 500 mL.180 Recommendation: Red blood cell salvage should be used. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 11e. Lung protective ventilation. A number of intraoperative techniques (low tidal volumes [typically 6-8 mL/ kg]), the use of positive end-expiratory pressure [typically 5-7 cm H2O], and regular intraoperative recruitment maneuvers) can reduce the incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications. However, data are lacking for open aortic surgery. A recent systematic review and metaanalysis of 95 RCTs enrolling 18,062 patients reported that in enhanced recovery programs, lung-protective ventilation, goal-directed fluid therapy, and thoracic epidural analgesia are each independently associated with the reduced rates of pulmonary complications after major abdominal surgery.181 Moderate quality evidence within this meta-analysis reported significant reductions in postoperative pulmonary complications for patients who had received intraoperative lung protective ventilation strategies. Owing to the high statistical heterogeneity, it is not possible to draw firm conclusions. No studies have reported evidence of harm using this strategy, and, as such, it is reasonable to adopt lung-protective ventilation strategies during open AAA surgery until further studies are undertaken and reported.182,183 Recommendation: Lung protective strategies should be used. Level of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 2 (weak) 1808 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 11f. Epidural analgesia. RCTs have compared general anesthesia with intraoperative epidural anesthesia to general anesthesia with systemic opioids with respect to reported pain, major complications, and death after open AAA surgery.184-190 These studies were included in a Cochrane review in 2016, which reported no differences in 30-day mortality after open AAA surgery. However, they found low to moderate quality evidence of a reduced rate of myocardial infarction, time to extubation, LOS in critical care, and postoperative respiratory failure, favoring epidural analgesia.191 The recently published National Institute for Health and Care Excellence clinical guidance on AAA management used stricter inclusion criteria and included fewer trials than those in the Cochrane group but also recommended that anesthesiologists consider using epidural analgesia in this high-risk patient group.169 One small RCT compared thoracic epidural infusion and continuous local wound infiltration in a ：fast-track； abdominal aortic surgery cohort and found that the local analgesia group had required more oral and intravenous analgesics but had had a similarly short time to ambulation, regular diet, and hospital discharge.189 No other data were available to make a recommendation regarding the use of transversus abdominis plane blocks or other locoregional anesthesia techniques (eg, rectus sheath and wound catheters) in open aortic surgery, although this is an area of rapidly advancing scientific study and recommendations could be possible in the future. Recommendation: Mid-thoracic (T6-T9) epidural analgesia is recommended intraoperatively and should be continued postoperatively as an infusion or patientcontrolled analgesia using a combination of local anesthetic and an opioid. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 12. Body temperature management Perioperative hypothermia (core body temperature 1000 patients undergoing vascular surgery, postoperative hyperglycemia was strongly associated with 11 different negative outcomes, including 30-day mortality, myocardial infarction, acute renal failure, stroke, wound complications, and a return to the operating room.240 Nondiabetic patients with hyperglycemia demonstrated an even stronger association with these negative surgical outcomes.240 In a multicenter RCT of 880 nondiabetic patients undergoing major abdominal surgery, preoperative carbohydrate loading prevented postoperative hyperglycemia and significantly reduced the number of patients requiring insulin to maintain a glucose level 150 mg/dL during the first 48 hours after surgery. Insulin infusion was protective against a composite end point of all-cause death, myocardial infarction, and congestive heart failure, and those patients did not experience a statistically significant different rate of hypoglycemia.239 Careful postoperative glycemic control with an emphasis on limiting extreme variability in glucose levels decreased the incidence of adverse cardiac events.239 However, caution is advised because overly aggressive glucose control causing hypoglycemia can increase mortality.241,242 No RCT data for a serum glucose threshold for initiating intraoperative insulin treatment, and no perioperative glucose targets have been agreed on for patients undergoing aortic operations.243 Recommendation: Glycemic control should be maintained, with intention of avoiding hypoglycemia. Level of evidence: B (moderate) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 20. Early mobilization. No high-quality studies regarding early mobility and open aortic surgery; however, many studies of ERAS-like pathways for open aortic surgery effectively used early mobility as a part of their care bundles.8 Extrapolating from other specialties, early mobility after aortic surgery likely decreases complications and improves patient outcomes.244,245 Successful mobilization strategies require a multidisciplinary approach, objective evaluation of patient safety and an ability for early ambulation, and tracking progress with a formal mobility scale.246 An early mobility protocol with at least twicedaily assessments increases mobility and decreases delirium and LOS.246 Those who are more physically fit preoperatively will be able to achieve postoperative mobility goals more quickly95; however, all patients should have a tailored, safe plan for ambulation.246 If patients are not progressing, the causes of failure should be analyzed by the multidisciplinary team, including physical therapists, and corrective measures should be instituted quickly. Recommendation: The use of a formal plan for early mobilization should be instituted, with early physical therapy involvement, when needed. Level of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) 21. Discharge education. It is reasonable to believe that the standard discharge criteria for many general surgery operations are applicable to aortic surgery patients, including tolerance of oral intake, recovery of lower gastrointestinal function, adequate pain control, ability to mobilize and perform self-care, and no evidence of complications or untreated medical problems.247 Up to 30% of aortic patients might have delirium or transient advanced mental impairment that complicates or delays discharge readiness.248 Patients undergoing vascular surgery have had 30-day readmission rates as high as 20% and up to one half of readmissions will be deemed avoidable.249-251 In line with fundamental ERAS philosophy, a published conceptual model of preventing readmissions in vascular surgery that includes patient education and timely communication from the preoperative phase to the postoperative phase of care.252 A Cochrane review of two RCTs concluded that written and verbal information on specific care instructions, medication lists, and when to seek medical attention at discharge significantly increased patient knowledge and satisfaction.253,254 The data on follow-up postoperative telephone calls has Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1811 Volume 75, Number 6 been mixed. A Cochrane review of 33 studies of mixed methods from different specialties was inconclusive; however, no adverse effects of the invention were reported.255 In-person visits might be more beneficial. Among patients experiencing a complication after open thoracic aneurysm repair, having a visit with a primary care physician within 30 days of the operation reduced the readmission rates from 35% to 20%.256 Recommendation: Both written and verbal discharge education should be used, with follow-up telephone calls within 24 to 48 hours after hospital discharge, and clinic follow-up visits should be scheduled with both the surgeon and the primary care physician at least once by 30 days postoperatively. Level of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: grade 1 (strong) 22. Audit of outcomes. Previous implementation of ERAS protocols in other surgical disciplines has led to a reduction in complications, shorter LOSs, and improved cost-savings. The analysis of the literature on ERAS audits has been based almost exclusively on systematic reviews, and prospective studies on this topic have yet to be developed. However, one prospective analysis comparing self-declared ERAS with non-ERAS hospitals demonstrated that having an ERAS protocol in place is not enough to improve patient outcomes.257 Other surgical specialties have demonstrated an association between increasing ERAS compliance and decreased surgical complications and LOS.258,259 Interactive auditing and reporting will identify areas of noncompliance, improve tracking of outcomes, and facilitate continuous quality improvement related to specific patient populations, care settings, and/or logistical issues.258 An observational study of >500 gynecologic patients found that using a compliance audit tool increased compliance from 56% to 77% and was associated with significant reductions in LOS.260 Another single-center preepost study of gynecologic patients demonstrated that structured ERAS implementation, including interactive auditing, resulted in better ERAS compliance and a shorter time to functional recovery and hospital discharge.261 Similar results were found at 13 centers that had participated in an international ERAS database for colorectal surgery; however, interestingly, 2 years after initiating the ERAS programs, auditing reveled that implementation compliance had decreased, which correlated with an increase in the LOS and complication rates.262 To improve the quality of ERAS auditing and reporting, the ERAS USA and ERAS Society have published the Reporting on ERAS Compliance, Outcomes, and Elements Research Checklist.7 This tool delineates the best practices for reporting clinical pathways and describing compliance. Clinicians are encouraged to use auditing tools; examples include the ERAS Interactive Audit System (available at: http:// erassociety.org/interactive-audit/) and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality safety program for improving surgical care and recovery (available at: https://www.ahrq.gov/hai/tools/enhanced-recovery/ind ex.html). Recommendation: The use of routine auditing of ERAS care processes and feedback to all staff involved is necessary. Level of evidence: C (low) Strength of recommendation: Grade 1 (strong) CARE ELEMENTS WITH CONFLICTING OR INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A RECOMMENDATION Some traditional clinical practices are in use for which the literature does not allow firm recommendations; therefore, they were not included in our consensus statement. Nevertheless, because of their common use in many institutions, the writing group has summarized the current state of knowledge. Preoperative medical risk assessment. A number of commonly used practices are of limited or no benefit in routine medical risk assessment. Preoperative routine chest radiography cannot be recommended because it has no supporting scientific evidence. It can be selectively used for patients with new or unstable cardiopulmonary signs or symptoms and for patients at increased risk of postoperative pulmonary complications if the results will alter management (ie, postpone surgery).263-265 In a large, prospective cohort study, the results from preoperative pulmonary function studies did not correlate with the postoperative outcomes and cannot be recommended as a routine part of a preoperative workup.266 Sources of infection, apart from skin and the operative environment, should be considered, such as elimination of potential septic dental sources $2 weeks before implantation of an aortic prosthesis.56 The predictive value of routine urinalysis in asymptomatic patients is poor267,268 but must be weighed against the potential infectious risk to prosthetic material.56 Although these measures make sense, no solid scientific background is available for a firm and specific recommendation. Hematologic disorders, specifically thrombocytopenia, should be evaluated preoperatively, preferably by a hematologist, because of the associated bleeding and mortality risk.269,270 Skin preparation. Based on meta-analysis of a small number of RCTs with heterogeneous surgical procedures and quasi-experimental cohort studies of vascular operations, hair clipping should be performed immediately preoperatively.271-273 Preoperative skin preparation should be standardized, with the operative area being scrubbed the day before and immediately before surgery with a chlorhexidine solution. This was based on RCTs of heterogeneous clean-contaminated surgeries, which indicated a benefit. However, conflicting evidence was 1812 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 found in smaller RCTs and prospective observational studies of vascular reconstructions that did not demonstrate benefit.274-276 Intraoperative fluid therapy. No reliable data are available to guide fluid management during open aortic surgery, and the need for research is obvious. The use of goal-directed fluid therapy has been recommended for many other major abdominal surgeries. However, fluid management during open aortic surgery is particularly complicated because of cardiac disease and crossclamping, which causes extreme disruptions in cardiac stress and fluid distribution in the body. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS This consensus statement represents the most recent evidenced-based recommendations from the ERAS Society guideline group and the SVS for the perioperative management of patients undergoing open aortic vascular surgery. These first ERAS recommendations for elective open aortic surgery are important in summarizing the large volume of heterogeneous studies across all ERAS elements for operations performed for either aortic aneurysm disease or aortoiliac occlusive disease. The authors・ recommendations provided in this intersocietal consensus statement are in accordance with the methods set out by the ERAS Society and SVS and are based on the synthesis of an objective assessment of the best available evidence in open aortic surgery, other surgical disciplines, and consensus of the guideline development group. The available evidence was graded and potential harm from the use of the care element was also considered in the recommendations; therefore, strong recommendations could have been reached from low-quality or conflicting data and vice versa. Likewise, this method clearly accounts for, and indicates where recommendations have been made, based on data extrapolated from other surgical specialties. The present consensus statement highlights the numerous research gaps that exist. Although the results from the few clinical studies available of cohorts of patients with aortic disease are promising, studies of high methodologic quality are needed. The lines of research to be developed could include any of the ERAS elements or combined elements but are likely to be particularly needed for preadmission optimization, prehabilitation, preoperative carbohydrate loading for those with diabetes, preanesthetic sedatives and analgesia, conditions for postoperative urinary catheter removal, early mobility protocols, postdischarge education, and auditing practices. Our main purpose was to define the current standards based on the available literature and to enable multidisciplinary teams to implement these procedures in their practice to investigate to what extent they can improve outcomes.1,277 As demonstrated in other specialties, using similar evidence-based guidelines and consensus statements to form care teams to enhance patient optimization and shared decision-making, focus on physiologic stress minimization, and reduce variations in postoperative convalescence promises to improve the safety and outcomes for patients undergoing open aortic operations. REFERENCES 1. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a review. JAMA Surg 2017;152:292-8. 2. Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control postoperative pathophysiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth 1997;78:606-17. 3. Fearon KC, Ljungqvist O, Von Meyenfeldt M, Revhaug A, Dejong CH, Lassen K, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery: a consensus review of clinical care for patients undergoing colonic resection. Clin Nutr 2005;24:466-77. 4. Brindle M, Nelson G, Lobo DN, Ljungqvist O, Gustafsson UO. Recommendations from the ERAS Society for standards for the development of enhanced recovery after surgery guidelines. BJS Open 2020;4:157-63. 5. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, AlonsoCoello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924-6. 6. Murad MH, Montori VM, Sidawy AN, Ascher E, Meissner MH, Chaikof EL, et al. Guideline methodology of the Society for Vascular Surgery including the experience with the GRADE framework. J Vasc Surg 2011;53:1375-80. 7. Elias KM, Stone AB, McGinigle K, Tankou JI, Scott MJ, Fawcett WJ, et al. The Reporting on ERAS Compliance, Outcomes, and Elements Research (RECOvER) Checklist: a joint statement by the ERAS((R)) and ERAS((R)) USA Societies. World J Surg 2019;43:1-8. 8. McGinigle KL, Eldrup-Jorgensen J, McCall R, Freeman NL, Pascarella L, Farber MA, et al. A systematic review of enhanced recovery after surgery for vascular operations. J Vasc Surg 2019;70: 629-40.e1. 9. Tatsuishi W, Kohri T, Kodera K, Asano R, Kataoka G, Kubota S, et al. Usefulness of an enhanced recovery after surgery protocol for perioperative management following open repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. Surg Today 2012;42:1195-200. 10. Feo CV, Portinari M, Tsolaki E, Romagnoni G, Verri M, Camerani S, et al. The effect of an enhanced recovery program in elective retroperitoneal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2016;63:888-94. 11. Muehling B, Schelzig H, Steffen P, Meierhenrich R, SunderPlassmann L, Orend KH. A prospective randomized trial comparing traditional and fast-track patient care in elective open infrarenal aneurysm repair. World J Surg 2009;33:577-85. 12. Brustia P, Renghi A, Aronici M, Gramaglia L, Porta C, Musiani A, et al. Fast-track in abdominal aortic surgery: experience in over 1,000 patients. Ann Vasc Surg 2015;29:1151-9. 13. Murphy MA, Richards T, Atkinson C, Perkins J, Hands LJ. Fast track open aortic surgery: reduced postoperative stay with a goal directed pathway. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2007;34:274-8. 14. Forsmo HM, Erichsen C, Rasdal A, Tvinnereim JM, K?rner H, Pfeffer F. Randomized controlled trial of extended perioperative counseling in enhanced recovery after colorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum 2018;61:724-32. 15. de Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Leal FS, Dantas DC, Anabuki NT, de Souza AM, Silva ELVP, et al. Preoperative education in cholecystectomy in the context of a multimodal protocol of perioperative care: a randomized, controlled trial. World J Surg 2014;38:357-62. 16. Gr?we JS, Mirow L, Bouchard R, Lindig M, H?ppe M. [Impact of preoperative patient education on postoperative pain in consideration of the individual coping style]. Schmerz (Berlin, Germany) 2010;24:575-86. 17. Muehling BM, Ortlieb L, Oberhuber A, Orend KH. Fast track management reduces the systemic inflammatory response and organ failure following elective infrarenal aortic aneurysm repair. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2011;12:784-8. Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1813 Volume 75, Number 6 18. Baron DM, Hochrieser H, Posch M, Metnitz B, Rhodes A, Moreno RP, et al. Preoperative anaemia is associated with poor clinical outcome in non-cardiac surgery patients. Br J Anaesth 2014;113:416-23. 19. Musallam KM, Tamim HM, Richards T, Spahn DR, Rosendaal FR, Habbal A, et al. Preoperative anaemia and postoperative outcomes in non-cardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 2011;378: 1396-407. 20. Spahn DR, Goodnough LT. Alternatives to blood transfusion. Lancet 2013;381:1855-65. 21. Isbister JP, Shander A, Spahn DR, Erhard J, Farmer SL, Hofmann A. Adverse blood transfusion outcomes: establishing causation. Transfus Med Rev 2011;25:89-101. 22. Spahn DR, Schoenrath F, Spahn GH, Seifert B, Stein P, Theusinger OM, et al. Effect of ultra-short-term treatment of patients with iron deficiency or anaemia undergoing cardiac surgery: a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 2019;393:2201-12. 23. Guinn NR, Guercio JR, Hopkins TJ, Grimsley A, Kurian DJ, Jimenez MI, et al. How do we develop and implement a preoperative anemia clinic designed to improve perioperative outcomes and reduce cost? Transfusion 2016;56:297-303. 24. Enko D, Wallner F, von-Goedecke A, Hirschmugl C, Auersperg V, Halwachs-Baumann G. The impact of an algorithm-guided management of preoperative anemia in perioperative hemoglobin level and transfusion of major orthopedic surgery patients. Anemia 2013;2013:641876. 25. Goodnough LT, Maniatis A, Earnshaw P, Benoni G, Beris P, Bisbe E, et al. Detection, evaluation, and management of preoperative anaemia in the elective orthopaedic surgical patient: NATA guidelines. Br J Anaesth 2011;106:13-22. 26. Kozek-Langenecker SA, Ahmed AB, Afshari A, Albaladejo P, Aldecoa C, Barauskas G, et al. Management of severe perioperative bleeding: guidelines from the European Society of Anaesthesiology: first update 2016. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2017;34:332-95. 27. Janssen TL, Steyerberg EW, van Gammeren AJ, Ho GH, Gobardhan PD, van der Laan L. Intravenous iron in a prehabilitation program for older surgical patients: prospective cohort study. J Surg Res 2021;257:32-41. 28. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Hubner M, Nygren J, Demartines N, Francis N, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colorectal surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations: 2018. World J Surg 2019;43:659-95. 29. Ng O, Keeler BD, Mishra A, Simpson JA, Neal K, Al-Hassi HO, et al. Iron therapy for preoperative anaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019;12:CD011588. 30. Richards T, Baikady RR, Clevenger B, Butcher A, Abeysiri S, Chau M, et al. Preoperative intravenous iron to treat anaemia before major abdominal surgery (PREVENTT): a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet 2020;396:1353-61. 31. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Epogen (epoetin alfa) injection, for intravenous or subcutaneous use. Drug label. Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/103234 s5363s5366lbl.pdf. Accessed September 28, 2020. 32. Stoppe C, Goetzenich A, Whitman G, Ohkuma R, Brown T, Hatzakorzian R, et al. Role of nutrition support in adult cardiac surgery: a consensus statement from an International Multidisciplinary Expert Group on Nutrition in Cardiac Surgery. Crit Care 2017;21:131. 33. Lomivorotov VV, Efremov SM, Boboshko VA, Nikolaev DA, Vedernikov PE, Lomivorotov VN, et al. Evaluation of nutritional screening tools for patients scheduled for cardiac surgery. Nutrition 2013;29:436-42. 34. Lomivorotov VV, Efremov SM, Boboshko VA, Nikolaev DA, Vedernikov PE, Deryagin MN, et al. Prognostic value of nutritional screening tools for patients scheduled for cardiac surgery. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2013;16:612-8. 35. Kodama A, Takahashi N, Sugimoto M, Niimi K, Banno H, Komori K. Associations of nutritional status and muscle size with mortality after open aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2019;70:1585-93. 36. Weimann A, Braga M, Carli F, Higashiguchi T, Hubner M, Klek S, et al. ESPEN guideline: clinical nutrition in surgery. Clin Nutr 2017;36: 623-50. 37. Lobo DN, Gianotti L, Adiamah A, Barazzoni R, Deutz NEP, Dhatariya K, et al. Perioperative nutrition: recommendations from the ESPEN expert group. Clin Nutr 2020;39:3211-27. 38. Moya P, Soriano-Irigaray L, Ramirez JM, Garcea A, Blasco O, Blanco FJ, et al. Perioperative standard oral nutrition supplements versus immunonutrition in patients undergoing colorectal resection in an enhanced recovery (ERAS) protocol: a multicenter randomized clinical trial (SONVI study). Medicine 2016;95:e3704. 39. Buzquurz F, Bojesen RD, Grube C, Madsen MT, Gogenur I. Impact of oral preoperative and perioperative immunonutrition on postoperative infection and mortality in patients undergoing cancer surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis. BJS Open 2020;4:764-75. 40. Moya P, Miranda E, Soriano-Irigaray L, Arroyo A, Aguilar M-D-M, Bellon M, et al. Perioperative immunonutrition in normo-nourished patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal resection. Surg Endosc 2016;30:4946-53. 41. Waitzberg DL, Saito H, Plank LD, Jamieson GG, Jagannath P, Hwang T-L, et al. Postsurgical infections are reduced with specialized nutrition support. World J Surg 2006;30:1592-604. 42. Jie B, Jiang Z-M, Nolan MT, Zhu S-N, Yu K, Kondrup J. Impact of preoperative nutritional support on clinical outcome in abdominal surgical patients at nutritional risk. Nutrition 2012;28:1022-7. 43. McClave SA, Kozar R, Martindale RG, Heyland DK, Braga M, Carli F, et al. Summary points and consensus recommendations from the North American Surgical Nutrition Summit. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2013;37(Suppl):99S-105S. 44. Arya S, Kim SI, Duwayri Y, Brewster LP, Veeraswamy R, Salam A, et al. Frailty increases the risk of 30-day mortality, morbidity, and failure to rescue after elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair independent of age and comorbidities. J Vasc Surg 2015;61:324-31. 45. Al Shakarchi J, Fairhead J, Rajagopalan S, Pherwani A, Jaipersad A. Impact of frailty on outcomes in patients undergoing open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Vasc Surg 2020;67:100-4. 46. Arya S, Long CA, Brahmbhatt R, Shafii S, Brewster LP, Veeraswamy R, et al. Preoperative frailty increases risk of nonhome discharge after elective vascular surgery in home-dwelling patients. Ann Vasc Surg 2016;35:19-29. 47. Donald GW, Ghaffarian AA, Isaac F, Kraiss LW, Griffin CL, Smith BK, et al. Preoperative frailty assessment predicts loss of independence after vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2018;68:1382-9. 48. George EL, Chen R, Trickey AW, Brooke BS, Kraiss L, Mell MW, et al. Variation in center-level frailty burden and the impact of frailty on long-term survival in patients undergoing elective repair for abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg 2020;71:46-55.e4. 49. George EL, Kashikar A, Rothenberg KA, Barreto NB, Chen R, Trickey AW, et al. Comparison of surgeon assessment to frailty measurement in abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Surg Res 2020;248:38-44. 50. Alvarez-Nebreda ML, Bentov N, Urman RD, Setia S, Huang JC, Pfeifer K, et al. Recommendations for preoperative management of frailty from the Society for Perioperative Assessment and Quality Improvement (SPAQI). J Clin Anesth 2018;47:33-42. 51. Partridge JS, Harari D, Martin FC, Peacock JL, Bell R, Mohammed A, et al. Randomized clinical trial of comprehensive geriatric assessment and optimization in vascular surgery. Br J Surg 2017;104: 679-87. 52. Raats JW, van Eijsden WA, Crolla RM, Steyerberg EW, van der Laan L. Risk factors and outcomes for postoperative delirium after major surgery in elderly patients. PLoS One 2015;10:e0136071. 53. Janssen TL, Steyerberg EW, Faes MC, Wijsman JH, Gobardhan PD, Ho GH, et al. Risk factors for postoperative delirium after elective major abdominal surgery in elderly patients: a cohort study. Int J Surg 2019;71:29-35. 54. Janssen TL, Steyerberg EW, Langenberg JCM, de Lepper C, Wielders D, Seerden TCJ, et al. Multimodal prehabilitation to reduce the incidence of delirium and other adverse events in elderly patients undergoing elective major abdominal surgery: an uncontrolled before-and-after study. PLoS One 2019;14:e0218152. 55. Wallbridge HR, Benoit AG, Staley D, Ediger JP, Campbell BI. Risk factors for postoperative cognitive and functional difficulties in abdominal aortic aneurysm patients: a three month follow-up. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2011;26:818-24. 56. Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, Jackson BM, Lee WA, Mansour MA, et al. The Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 2018:2-77. 1814 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 57. Wong J, Lam DP, Abrishami A, Chan MT, Chung F. Short-term preoperative smoking cessation and postoperative complications: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anesth 2012;59:268-79. 58. Tonnesen H, Nielsen PR, Lauritzen JB, Moller AM. Smoking and alcohol intervention before surgery: evidence for best practice. Br J Anaesth 2009;102:297-306. 59. Sorensen LT. Wound healing and infection in surgery: the clinical impact of smoking and smoking cessation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Surg 2012;147:373-83. 60. Hughes JR, Stead LF, Hartmann-Boyce J, Cahill K, Lancaster T. Antidepressants for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;1:CD000031. 61. Oppedal K, M?ller AM, Pedersen B, T?nnesen H. Preoperative alcohol cessation prior to elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;7:CD008343. 62. Shabanzadeh DM, Sorensen LT. Alcohol consumption increases post-operative infection but not mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2015;16:657-68. 63. Bahia SS, Holt PJ, Jackson D, Patterson BO, Hinchliffe RJ, Thompson MM, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of longterm survival after elective infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 1969-2011: 5 year survival remains poor despite advances in medical care and treatment strategies. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2015;50:320-30. 64. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, Beckman JA, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Circulation 2014;130:e278-333. 65. Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, Thomas EJ, Polanczyk CA, Cook EF, et al. Derivation and prospective validation of a simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery. Circulation 1999;100:1043-9. 66. Gupta PK, Gupta H, Sundaram A, Kaushik M, Fang X, Miller WJ, et al. Development and validation of a risk calculator for prediction of cardiac risk after surgery. Circulation 2011;124:381-7. 67. Bertges DJ, Neal D, Schanzer A, Scali ST, Goodney PP, EldrupJorgensen J, et al. The Vascular Quality Initiative cardiac risk index for prediction of myocardial infarction after vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2016;64:1411-21.e4. 68. Eslami MH, Rybin DV, Doros G, Siracuse JJ, Farber A. External validation of Vascular Study Group of New England risk predictive model of mortality after elective abdominal aorta aneurysm repair in the Vascular Quality Initiative and comparison against established models. J Vasc Surg 2018;67:143-50. 69. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Surveillance report 2018. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification. NICE guideline CG181. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg181 2014. Accessed December 10, 2020. 70. Pearson TA, Blair SN, Daniels SR, Eckel RH, Fair JM, Fortmann SP, et al. AHA guidelines for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and stroke: 2002 update: consensus panel guide to comprehensive risk reduction for adult patients without coronary or other atherosclerotic vascular diseases. American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee. Circulation 2002;106: 388-91. 71. Piepoli MF, Hoes AW, Agewall S, Albus C, Brotons C, Catapano AL, et al. 2016 European guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed) 2016;69:939. 72. Alagona P Jr, Ahmad TA. Cardiovascular disease risk assessment and prevention: current guidelines and limitations. Med Clin North Am 2015;99:711-31. 73. Bouri S, Shun-Shin MJ, Cole GD, Mayet J, Francis DP. Meta-analysis of secure randomised controlled trials of beta-blockade to prevent perioperative death in non-cardiac surgery. Heart 2014;100: 456-64. 74. American Diabetes Association. 10. Cardiovascular disease and risk management: standards of medical care in diabetesd2019. Diabetes Care 2019;42(Suppl 1):S103-23. 75. Newman JD, Wilcox T, Smilowitz NR, Berger JS. Influence of diabetes on trends in perioperative cardiovascular events. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1268-74. 76. Martin-Gonzalez T, Pincon C, Hertault A, Maurel B, Labbe D, Spear R, et al. Renal outcomes analysis after endovascular and open aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2015;62:569-77. 77. Nguyen BN, Neville RF, Rahbar R, Amdur R, Sidawy AN. Comparison of outcomes for open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair and endovascular repair in patients with chronic renal insufficiency. Ann Surg 2013;258:394-9. 78. Kellum JA, Lameire N; KDIGO AKI Guideline Work Group. Diagnosis, evaluation, and management of acute kidney injury: a KDIGO summary (part 1). Crit Care 2013;17:204. 79. Bown MJ, Norwood MG, Sayers RD. The management of abdominal aortic aneurysms in patients with concurrent renal impairment. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2005;30:1-11. 80. Pouwels S, Willigendael EM, van Sambeek MR, Nienhuijs SW, Cuypers PW, Teijink JA. Beneficial effects of pre-operative exercise therapy in patients with an abdominal aortic aneurysm: a systematic review. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2015;49:66-76. 81. Gillis C, Gramlich L, Culos-Reed SN, Sajobi TT, Fiest KM, Carli F, et al. Third-variable effects: tools to understand who, when, why, and how patients benefit from surgical prehabilitation. J Surg Res 2021;258: 443-52. 82. Carli F, Awasthi R, Gillis C, Baldini G, Bessissow A, Liberman AS, et al. Integrating prehabilitation in the preoperative clinic: a paradigm shift in perioperative care. Anesth Analg 2021;132: 1494-500. 83. Arthur HM, Daniels C, McKelvie R, Hirsh J, Rush B. Effect of a preoperative intervention on preoperative and postoperative outcomes in low-risk patients awaiting elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2000;133:253-62. 84. Sawatzky JA, Kehler DS, Ready AE, Lerner N, Boreskie S, Lamont D, et al. Prehabilitation program for elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery patients: a pilot randomized controlled study. Clin Rehabil 2014;28:648-57. 85. Stammers AN, Kehler DS, Afilalo J, Avery LJ, Bagshaw SM, Grocott HP, et al. Protocol for the PREHAB studydpre-operative rehabilitation for reduction of hospitalization after coronary bypass and valvular surgery: a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open 2015;5:e007250. 86. Barberan-Garcia A, Ubre M, Roca J, Lacy AM, Burgos F, Risco R, et al. Personalised prehabilitation in high-risk patients undergoing elective major abdominal surgery: a randomized blinded controlled trial. Ann Surg 2018;267:50-6. 87. Li C, Carli F, Lee L, Charlebois P, Stein B, Liberman AS, et al. Impact of a trimodal prehabilitation program on functional recovery after colorectal cancer surgery: a pilot study. Surg Endosc 2013;27: 1072-82. 88. Gillis C, Li C, Lee L, Awasthi R, Augustin B, Gamsa A, et al. Prehabilitation versus rehabilitation: a randomized control trial in patients undergoing colorectal resection for cancer. Anesthesiology 2014;121:937-47. 89. Engelman DT, Ali WB, Williams JB, Perrault LP, Reddy VS, Arora RC, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in cardiac surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society recommendations. JAMA Surg 2019;154:755-66. 90. Melloul E, Lassen K, Roulin D, Grass F, Perinel J, Adham M, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care for pancreatoduodenectomy: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) recommendations 2019. World J Surg 2020;44:2056-84. 91. Wee IJY, Choong A. A systematic review of the impact of preoperative exercise for patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 2020;71. 2123-2131.e1. 92. Barakat HM, Shahin Y, Khan JA, McCollum PT, Chetter IC. Preoperative supervised exercise improves outcomes after elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg 2016;264:47-53. 93. Dronkers J, Veldman A, Hoberg E, van der Waal C, van Meeteren N. Prevention of pulmonary complications after upper abdominal surgery by preoperative intensive inspiratory muscle training: a randomized controlled pilot study. Clin Rehabil 2008;22:134-42. 94. Tew GA, Moss J, Crank H, Mitchell PA, Nawaz S. Endurance exercise training in patients with small abdominal aortic aneurysm: a randomized controlled pilot study. Arch Phys Med Rehab 2012;93: 2148-53. Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1815 Volume 75, Number 6 95. Hayashi K, Hirashiki A, Kodama A, Kobayashi K, Yasukawa Y, Shimizu M, et al. Impact of preoperative regular physical activity on postoperative course after open abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. Heart Vessels 2016;31:578-83. 96. Oscarsson A, Gupta A, Fredrikson M, Jarhult J, Nystrom M, Pettersson E, et al. To continue or discontinue aspirin in the perioperative period: a randomized, controlled clinical trial. Br J Anaesth 2010;104:305-12. 97. Feringa HHH, Bax JJ, Karagiannis SE, Noordzij P, van Domburg R, Klein J, et al. Elderly patients undergoing major vascular surgery: risk factors and medication associated with risk reduction. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2009;48:116-20. 98. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, Fleisher LA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on clinical practice guidelines: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of STelevation myocardial infarction, 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Circulation 2016;134:e123-55. 99. Holcomb CN, Graham LA, Richman JS, Rhyne RR, Itani KMF, Maddox TM, et al. The incremental risk of noncardiac surgery on adverse cardiac events following coronary stenting. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64:2730-9. 100. Holcomb CN, Hollis RH, Graham LA, Richman JS, Valle JA, Itani KM, et al. Association of coronary stent indication with postoperative outcomes following noncardiac surgery. JAMA Surg 2016;151:462-9. 101. Cruden NL, Harding SA, Flapan AD, Graham C, Wild SH, Slack R, et al. Previous coronary stent implantation and cardiac events in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2010;3:236-42. 102. Hawn MT, Graham LA, Richman JS, Itani KM, Henderson WG, Maddox TM. Risk of major adverse cardiac events following noncardiac surgery in patients with coronary stents. JAMA 2013;310: 1462-72. 103. Rossini R, Tarantini G, Musumeci G, Masiero G, Barbato E, Calabro P, et al. A multidisciplinary approach on the perioperative antithrombotic management of patients with coronary stents undergoing surgery: surgery after stenting 2. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2018;11: 417-34. 104. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland; Obstetric Anaesthetists・ Association; Regional Anaesthesia UK, Cook T, Gill H, Hill D, et al. Regional anaesthesia and patients with abnormalities of coagulation: the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland The Obstetric Anaesthetists・ Association Regional Anaesthesia UK. Anaesthesia 2013;68:966-72. 105. Horlocker TT, Vandermeuelen E, Kopp SL, Gogarten W, Leffert LR, Benzon HT. Regional anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based guidelines (fourth edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med 2018;43:263-309. 106. Spahn DR, Munoz M, Klein AA, Levy JH, Zacharowski K. Patient blood management: effectiveness and future potential. Anesthesiology 2020;133:212-22. 107. Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, Smith A, O・Sullivan G, Soreide E, et al. Perioperative fasting in adults and children: guidelines from the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2011;28: 556-69. 108. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists task force on preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anesthesiology 2017;126: 376-93. 109. Hausel J, Nygren J, Thorell A, Lagerkranser M, Ljungqvist O. Randomized clinical trial of the effects of oral preoperative carbohydrates on postoperative nausea and vomiting after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Surg 2005;92:415-21. 110. Gianotti L, Biffi R, Sandini M, Marrelli D, Vignali A, Caccialanza R, et al. Preoperative oral carbohydrate load versus placebo in major elective abdominal surgery (PROCY): a randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter, phase III trial. Ann Surg 2018;267:623-30. 111. Wang ZG, Wang Q, Wang WJ, Qin HL. Randomized clinical trial to compare the effects of preoperative oral carbohydrate versus placebo on insulin resistance after colorectal surgery. Br J Surg 2010;97: 317-27. 112. Faria MS, de Aguilar-Nascimento JE, Pimenta OS, Alvarenga LC Jr, Dock-Nascimento DB, Slhessarenko N. Preoperative fasting of 2 hours minimizes insulin resistance and organic response to trauma after video-cholecystectomy: a randomized, controlled, clinical trial. World J Surg 2009;33:1158-64. 113. Rapp-Kesek D, Stridsberg M, Andersson LG, Berne C, Karlsson T. Insulin resistance after cardiopulmonary bypass in the elderly patient. Scand Cardiovasc J 2007;41:102-8. 114. Noblett SE, Watson DS, Huong H, Davison B, Hainsworth PJ, Horgan AF. Pre-operative oral carbohydrate loading in colorectal surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Colorectal Dis 2006;8: 563-9. 115. Lee B, Soh S, Shim JK, Kim HY, Lee H, Kwak YL. Evaluation of preoperative oral carbohydrate administration on insulin resistance in off-pump coronary artery bypass patients: a randomised trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2017;34:740-7. 116. Feguri GR, Lima PR, Lopes AM, Roledo A, Marchese M, Trevisan M, et al. Clinical and metabolic results of fasting abbreviation with carbohydrates in coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Rev Bras Cir Cardiovasc 2012;27:7-17. 117. Breuer JP, von Dossow V, von Heymann C, Griesbach M, von Schickfus M, Mackh E, et al. Preoperative oral carbohydrate administration to ASA III-IV patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg 2006;103:1099-108. 118. Noba L, Wakefield A. Are carbohydrate drinks more effective than preoperative fasting: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. J Clin Nurs 2019;28:3096-116. 119. Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L, Herbison GP, Soop M, Nygren J. Preoperative carbohydrate treatment for enhancing recovery after elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;8:CD009161. 120. Gustafsson UO, Nygren J, Thorell A, Soop M, Hellstrom PM, Ljungqvist O, et al. Pre-operative carbohydrate loading may be used in type 2 diabetes patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2008;52:946-51. 121. Laffin MR, Li S, Brisebois R, Senior PA, Wang H. The use of a preoperative carbohydrate drink in patients with diabetes mellitus: a prospective, non-inferiority, cohort study. World J Surg 2018;42: 1965-70. 122. Farkas JC, Chapuis C, Combe S, Silsiguen M, Marzelle J, Laurian C, et al. A randomised controlled trial of a low-molecular-weight heparin (Enoxaparin) to prevent deep-vein thrombosis in patients undergoing vascular surgery. Eur J Vasc Surg 1993;7:554-60. 123. Pawlaczyk K, Gabriel M, Dzieciuchowicz L, Stanisic M, BegierKrasinska B, Gabriel Z, et al. Post-operative venous thromboembolism in patients operated on for aorto-iliac obstruction and abdominal aortic aneurysm, and the application of pharmacological thromboprophylaxis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2016;51:121-6. 124. de Maistre E, Terriat B, Lesne-Padieu AS, Abello N, Bouchot O, Steinmetz EF. High incidence of venous thrombosis after surgery for abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 2009;49:596-601. 125. Khan NK, Oksala NK, Suominen V, Vakhitov D, JO Laurikka, Khan JA. Risk of symptomatic venous thromboembolism after abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in long-term follow-up of 1021 consecutive patients. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord 2021;9:54-61. 126. Ramanan B, Gupta PK, Sundaram A, Lynch TG, MacTaggart JN, Baxter BT, et al. In-hospital and postdischarge venous thromboembolism after vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2013;57:1589-96. 127. Toth S, Flohr TR, Schubart J, Knehans A, Castello MC, Aziz F. A metaanalysis and systematic review of venous thromboembolism prophylaxis in patients undergoing vascular surgery procedures. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord 2020;8:869-81.e2. 128. Killewich LA, Aswad MA, Sandager GP, Lilly MP, Flinn WR. A randomized, prospective trial of deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis in aortic surgery. Arch Surg 1997;132:499-504. 1816 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 129. Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, Karanicolas PJ, Arcelus JI, Heit JA, et al. Prevention of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2012;141(Suppl):e227S-77S. 130. Nicolaides AN, Fareed J, Kakkar AK, Comerota AJ, Goldhaber SZ, Hull R, et al. Prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolismdinternational consensus statement. Int Angiol 2013;32:111-260. 131. Ip HY, Abrishami A, Peng PW, Wong J, Chung F. Predictors of postoperative pain and analgesic consumption: a qualitative systematic review. Anesthesiology 2009;111:657-77. 132. American Geriatrics Society 2015 Beers Criteria Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society 2015 updated Beers criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015;63:2227-46. 133. Gaulton TG, Wunsch H, Gaskins LJ, Leonard CE, Hennessy S, Ashburn M, et al. Preoperative sedative-hypnotic medication use and adverse postoperative outcomes. Ann Surg 2021;274:e108-14. 134. Wongkietkachorn A, Wongkietkachorn N, Rhunsiri P. Preoperative needs-based education to reduce anxiety, increase satisfaction, and decrease time spent in day surgery: a randomized controlled trial. World J Surg 2018;42:666-74. 135. Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, Demartines N, Roulin D, Francis N, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS()) Society recommendations. World J Surg 2013;37:259-84. 136. Torrance N, Veluchamy A, Zhou Y, Fletcher EH, Moir E, Hebert HL, et al. Trends in gabapentinoid prescribing, co-prescribing of opioids and benzodiazepines, and associated deaths in Scotland. Br J Anaesth 2020;125:159-67. 137. McAnally H, Bonnet U, Kaye AD. Gabapentinoid benefit and risk stratification: mechanisms over myth. Pain Ther 2020;9:441-52. 138. Sheth KR, Bernthal NM, Ho HS, Bergese SD, Apfel CC, Stoicea N, et al. Perioperative bleeding and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: an evidence-based literature review, and current clinical appraisal. Medicine (Baltimore) 2020;99:e20042. 139. Stewart A, Eyers PS, Earnshaw JJ. Prevention of infection in arterial reconstruction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;3:CD003073. 140. Engelman R, Shahian D, Shemin R, Guy TS, Bratzler D, Edwards F, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series: antibiotic prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, part II: antibiotic choice. Ann Thorac Surg 2007;83:1569-76. 141. Edwards FH, Engelman RM, Houck P, Shahian DM, Bridges CR; Society of Thoracic Surgeons. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series: antibiotic prophylaxis in cardiac surgery, part i: duration. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;81:397-404. 142. Zanetti G, Giardina R, Platt R. Intraoperative redosing of cefazolin and risk for surgical site infection in cardiac surgery. Emerg Infect Dis 2001;7:828-31. 143. Bratzler DW, Houck PM. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery: an advisory statement from the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1706-15. 144. Swoboda SM, Merz C, Kostuik J, Trentler B, Lipsett PA. Does intraoperative blood loss affect antibiotic serum and tissue concentrations? Arch Surg 1996;131:1165-71; discussion: 1171, 1162. 145. Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, Chung F, Diemunsch P, Habib AS, et al. Fourth consensus guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2020;131:411-48. 146. Apfel CC, Heidrich FM, Jukar-Rao S, Jalota L, Hornuss C, Whelan RP, et al. Evidence-based analysis of risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting. Br J Anaesth 2012;109:742-53. 147. Apfel CC, Laara E, Koivuranta M, Greim CA, Roewer N. A simplified risk score for predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting: conclusions from cross-validations between two centers. Anesthesiology 1999;91:693-700. 148. Koivuranta M, Laara E, Snare L, Alahuhta S. A survey of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anaesthesia 1997;52:443-9. 149. Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, Kerger H, Turan A, Vedder I, et al. A factorial trial of six interventions for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2441-51. 150. Liu SS, Strodtbeck WM, Richman JM, Wu CL. A comparison of regional versus general anesthesia for ambulatory anesthesia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesth Analg 2005;101:1634-42. 151. Apfel CC, Turan A, Souza K, Pergolizzi J, Hornuss C. Intravenous acetaminophen reduces postoperative nausea and vomiting: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2013;154:677-89. 152. Elia N, Lysakowski C, Tramer MR. Does multimodal analgesia with acetaminophen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, or selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and patient-controlled analgesia morphine offer advantages over morphine alone? Meta-analyses of randomized trials. Anesthesiology 2005;103:1296-304. 153. Cao X, White PF, Ma H. An update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. J Anesth 2017;31:617-26. 154. Kaye AD, Cornett EM, Chalabi J, Naim NZ, Novitch MB, Creel JB, et al. Pharmacology of antiemetics: update and current considerations in anesthesia practice. Anesthesiol Clin 2017;35:e41-54. 155. McLean DJ, Diaz-Gil D, Farhan HN, Ladha KS, Kurth T, Eikermann M. Dose-dependent association between intermediate-acting neuromuscular-blocking agents and postoperative respiratory complications. Anesthesiology 2015;122:1201-13. 156. Brull SJ, Murphy GS. Residual neuromuscular block: lessons unlearned. Part II: methods to reduce the risk of residual weakness. Anesth Analg 2010;111:129-40. 157. Brull SJ, Kopman AF. Current status of neuromuscular reversal and monitoring: challenges and opportunities. Anesthesiology 2017;126: 173-90. 158. Kheterpal S, Vaughn MT, Dubovoy TZ, Shah NJ, Bash LD, Colquhoun DA, et al. Sugammadex versus neostigmine for reversal of neuromuscular blockade and postoperative pulmonary complications (STRONGER): a multicenter matched cohort analysis. Anesthesiology 2020;132:1371-81. 159. Oh TK, Oh A-Y, Ryu J-H, Koo B-W, Song I-A, Nam SW, et al. Retrospective analysis of 30-day unplanned readmission after major abdominal surgery with reversal by sugammadex or neostigmine. Br J Anaesth 2019;122:370-8. 160. Togioka BM, Yanez D, Aziz MF, Higgins JR, Tekkali P, Treggiari MM. Randomised controlled trial of sugammadex or neostigmine for reversal of neuromuscular block on the incidence of pulmonary complications in older adults undergoing prolonged surgery. Br J Anaesth 2020;124:553-61. 161. Bender JS, Smith-Meek MA, Jones CE. Routine pulmonary artery catheterization does not reduce morbidity and mortality of elective vascular surgery: results of a prospective, randomized trial. Ann Surg 1997;226:229-36; discussion: 236. 162. Bonazzi M, Gentile F, Biasi GM, Migliavacca S, Esposti D, Cipolla M, et al. Impact of perioperative haemodynamic monitoring on cardiac morbidity after major vascular surgery in low risk patients: a randomised pilot trial. Eur J Vasc Endovas Surg 2002;23:445-51. 163. American Society of Anesthesiologists; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force on Transesophageal Echocardiography. Practice guidelines for perioperative transesophageal echocardiography: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists and the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force on Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesthesiology 2010;112:1084-96. 164. Fayad A, Shillcutt SK. Perioperative transesophageal echocardiography for non-cardiac surgery. Can J Anaesth 2018;65:381-98. 165. Hadian M, Pinsky MR. Evidence-based review of the use of the pulmonary artery catheter: impact data and complications. Crit Care 2006;10(Suppl 3):S8. 166. Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, Kurz A, Turan A, Rodseth RN, et al. Relationship between intraoperative mean arterial pressure and clinical outcomes after noncardiac surgery: toward an empirical definition of hypotension. Anesthesiology 2013;119:507-15. 167. van Waes JAR, van Klei WA, Wijeysundera DN, van Wolfswinkel L, Lindsay TF, Beattie WS. Association between intraoperative hypotension and myocardial injury after vascular surgery. Anesthesiology 2016;124:35-44. 168. Salmasi V, Maheshwari K, Yang D, Mascha EJ, Singh A, Sessler DI, et al. Relationship between intraoperative hypotension, defined by either reduction from baseline or absolute thresholds, and acute kidney and myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort analysis. Anesthesiology 2017;126:47-65. Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1817 Volume 75, Number 6 169. National Institute for Health Care Excellence. Abdominal aortic aneurysm: diagnosis and management. Available at: https://www. nice.org.uk/guidance/ng156. Accessed December 10, 2020. 170. De Freitas S, Hicks CW, Mouton R, Garcia S, Healy D, Connolly C, et al. Effects of ischemic preconditioning on abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Surg Res 2019;235: 340-9. 171. Baldwin L, Henderson A, Hickman P. Effect of postoperative lowdose dopamine on renal function after elective major vascular surgery. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:744-7. 172. Gillies MA, Kakar V, Parker RJ, Honore PM, Ostermann M. Fenoldopam to prevent acute kidney injury after major surgeryda systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2015;19:449. 173. Halpenny M, Rushe C, Breen P, Cunningham AJ, Boucher-Hayes D, Shorten GD. The effects of fenoldopam on renal function in patients undergoing elective aortic surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2002;19:32-9. 174. Khwaja A. KDIGO clinical practice guidelines for acute kidney injury. Nephron Clin Pract 2012;120:c179-84. 175. Hersey P, Poullis M. Does the administration of mannitol prevent renal failure in open abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2008;7:906-9. 176. Dubois L, Durant C, Harrington DM, Forbes TL, Derose G, Harris JR. Technical factors are strongest predictors of postoperative renal dysfunction after open transperitoneal juxtarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2013;57:648-54. 177. Deery SE, Lancaster RT, Baril DT, Indes JE, Bertges DJ, Conrad MF, et al. Contemporary outcomes of open complex abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg 2016;63:1195-200. 178. Shantikumar S, Patel S, Handa A. The role of cell salvage autotransfusion in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2011;42:577-84. 179. Takagi H, Sekino S, Kato T, Matsuno Y, Umemoto T. Intraoperative autotransfusion in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery: metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Surg 2007;142: 1098-101. 180. Klein AA, Bailey CR, Charlton AJ, Evans E, Guckian-Fisher M, McCrossan R, et al. Association of Anaesthetists guidelines: cell salvage for peri-operative blood conservation 2018. Anaesthesia 2018;73:1141-50. 181. Odor PM, Bampoe S, Gilhooly D, Creagh-Brown B, Moonesinghe SR. Perioperative interventions for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2020;368:m540. 182. Futier E, Constantin J-M, Paugam-Burtz C, Pascal J, Eurin M, Neuschwander A, et al. A trial of intraoperative low-tidalvolume ventilation in abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med 2013;369:428-37. 183. Guldner A, Kiss T, Serpa Neto A, Hemmes SNT, Canet J, Spieth PM, et al. Intraoperative protective mechanical ventilation for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications: a comprehensive review of the role of tidal volume, positive end-expiratory pressure, and lung recruitment maneuvers. Anesthesiology 2015;123:692-713. 184. Park WY, Thompson JS, Lee KK. Effect of epidural anesthesia and analgesia on perioperative outcome: a randomized, controlled Veterans Affairs cooperative study. Ann Surg 2001;234:560-9; discussion: 569-71. 185. Peyton PJ, Myles PS, Silbert BS, Rigg JA, Jamrozik K, Parsons R. Perioperative epidural analgesia and outcome after major abdominal surgery in high-risk patients. Anesth Analg 2003;96:548. table of contents. 186. Broekema AA, Veen A, Fidler V, Gielen MJ, Hennis PJ. Postoperative analgesia with intramuscular morphine at fixed rate versus epidural morphine or sufentanil and bupivacaine in patients undergoing major abdominal surgery. Anesth Analg 1998;87:1346-53. 187. Boylan JF, Katz J, Kavanagh BP, Klinck JR, Cheng DC, DeMajo WC, et al. Epidural bupivacaine-morphine analgesia versus patient-controlled analgesia following abdominal aortic surgery: analgesic, respiratory, and myocardial effects. Anesthesiology 1998;89:585-93. 188. Bois S, Couture P, Boudreault D, Lacombe P, Fugere F, Girard D, et al. Epidural analgesia and intravenous patient-controlled analgesia result in similar rates of postoperative myocardial ischemia after aortic surgery. Anesth Analg 1997;85:1233-9. 189. Renghi A, Gramaglia L, Casella F, Moniaci D, Gaboli K, Brustia P. Local versus epidural anesthesia in fast-track abdominal aortic surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2013;27:451-8. 190. Norris EJ, Beattie C, Perler BA, Martinez EA, Meinert CL, Anderson GF, et al. Double-masked randomized trial comparing alternate combinations of intraoperative anesthesia and postoperative analgesia in abdominal aortic surgery. Anesthesiology 2001;95:1054-67. 191. Guay J, Kopp S. Epidural pain relief versus systemic opioid-based pain relief for abdominal aortic surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;1:CD005059. 192. National Institutes of Health and Care Excellence. Hypothermia: prevention and management in adults having surgery. NICE Clinical Guidelines, No. 65. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ cg65. Accessed December 10, 2020. 193. Healy D, Clarke-Moloney M, Hannigan A, Walsh S. Wound drainage for lower limb arterial surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;11: CD011111. 194. Kwon J, Staley C, McCullough M, Goss S, Arosemena M, Abai B, et al. A randomized clinical trial evaluating negative pressure therapy to decrease vascular groin incision complications. J Vasc Surg 2018;68: 1744-52. 195. Matatov T, Reddy KN, Doucet LD, Zhao CX, Zhang WW. Experience with a new negative pressure incision management system in prevention of groin wound infection in vascular surgery patients. J Vasc Surg 2013;57:791-5. 196. Lee K, Murphy PB, Ingves MV, Duncan A, DeRose G, Dubois L, et al. Randomized clinical trial of negative pressure wound therapy for high-risk groin wounds in lower extremity revascularization. J Vasc Surg 2017;66:1814-9. 197. Popping DM, Elia N, Van Aken HK, Marret E, Schug SA, Kranke P, et al. Impact of epidural analgesia on mortality and morbidity after surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Surg 2014;259:1056-67. 198. Brown EN, Pavone KJ, Naranjo M. Multimodal general anesthesia: theory and practice. Anesth Analg 2018;127:1246-58. 199. Cerantola Y, Valerio M, Persson B, Jichlinski P, Ljungqvist O, Hubner M, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS()) Society recommendations. Clin Nutr 2013;32: 879-87. 200. Scott MJ, Baldini G, Fearon KC, Feldheiser A, Feldman LS, Gan TJ, et al. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) for gastrointestinal surgery, part 1: pathophysiological considerations. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2015;59:1212-31. 201. Kang SH, Lee Y, Min S-H, Park YS, Ahn S-H, Park DJ, et al. Multimodal Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) program is the optimal perioperative care in patients undergoing totally laparoscopic distal gastrectomy for gastric cancer: a prospective, randomized, clinical trial. Ann Surg Oncol 2018;25:3231-8. 202. Kumar K, Kirksey MA, Duong S, Wu CL. A review of opioid-sparing modalities in perioperative pain management: methods to decrease opioid use postoperatively. Anesth Analg 2017;125:1749-60. 203. Bell RF, Dahl JB, Moore RA, Kalso E. Perioperative ketamine for acute postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;1: CD004603. 204. Cheung CC, Martyn A, Campbell N, Frost S, Gilbert K, Michota F, et al. Predictors of intraoperative hypotension and bradycardia. Am J Med 2015;128:532-8. 205. Eipe N, Penning J, Yazdi F, Mallick R, Turner L, Ahmadzai N, et al. Perioperative use of pregabalin for acute pain-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2015;156:1284-300. 206. Ge DJ, Qi B, Tang G, Li JY. Intraoperative dexmedetomidine promotes postoperative analgesia and recovery in patients after abdominal hysterectomy: a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. Sci Rep 2016;6:21514. 207. Kranke P, Jokinen J, Pace NL, Schnabel A, Hollmann MW, Hahnenkamp K, et al. Continuous intravenous perioperative lidocaine infusion for postoperative pain and recovery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;7:CD009642. 208. Bahr MP, Williams BA. Esmolol, antinociception, and its potential opioid-sparing role in routine anesthesia care. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2018;43:815-8. 1818 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022 209. Chidgey BA, McGinigle KL, McNaull PP. When a vital sign leads a country astraydthe opioid epidemic. JAMA Surg 2019;154:987-8. 210. Santosa KB, Hu H-M, Brummett CM, Olsen MA, Englesbe MJ, Williams EA, et al. New persistent opioid use among older patients following surgery: a Medicare claims analysis. Surgery 2020;167: 732-42. 211. Clegg A, Young JB. Which medications to avoid in people at risk of delirium: a systematic review. Age Ageing 2011;40:23-9. 212. Duprey MS, Dijkstra-Kersten SMA, Zaal IJ, Briesacher BA, Saczynski JS, Griffith JL, et al. Opioid use increases the risk of delirium in critically ill adults independently of pain. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2021;204:566-72. 213. Benzon HT, Raja S, Liu SS, Fishman S, Cohen SP. Essentials of Pain Medicine. 4th ed. 2018. Elsevier. 214. Wei ZW, Li JL, Li ZS, Hao YT, He YL, Chen W, et al. Systematic review of nasogastric or nasojejunal decompression after gastrectomy for gastric cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol 2014;40:1763-70. 215. Wang D, Li T, Yu J, Hu Y, Liu H, Li G. Is nasogastric or nasojejunal decompression necessary following gastrectomy for gastric cancer? A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Gastrointest Surg 2015;19:195-204. 216. Vermeulen H, Storm-Versloot MN, Busch OR, Ubbink DT. Nasogastric intubation after abdominal surgery: a meta-analysis of recent literature. Arch Surg 2006;141:307-14. 217. Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B. Prophylactic nasogastric decompression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;3: CD004929. 218. Avrahami R, Cohen JD, Haddad M, Singer P, Zelikovski A. Gastric emptying after elective abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery: the case for early postoperative enteral feeding. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 1999;17:241-4. 219. Ksienski MR, Fenton TR, Eliasziw M, Zuege DJ, Petrasek P, Shahpori R, et al. A cohort study of nutrition practices in the intensive care unit following abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Parenter Ther 2013;37:261-7. 220. Martelli M, Renghi A, Gramaglia L, Casella F, Brustia P. Abdominal aortic aneurysm treatment: minimally invasive fast-track surgery and endovascular technique in octogenarians. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 2017;58:557-64. 221. Lohr G, Keller H, Kutscher J, Huber R. [Fast-track rehabilitation after open aorto-iliac vascular procedures]. Zentralbl Chir 2008;133: 344-8. 222. Dass B, Shimada M, Kambhampati G, Ejaz NI, Arif AA, Ejaz AA. Fluid balance as an early indicator of acute kidney injury in CV surgery. Clin Nephrol 2012;77:438-44. 223. Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, Forbes A, Peyton P, Story D, et al. Restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med 2018;378:2263-74. 224. Jonsson K, Jensen JA, Goodson WH III, Scheuenstuhl H, West J, Hopf HW, et al. Tissue oxygenation, anemia, and perfusion in relation to wound healing in surgical patients. Ann Surg 1991;214:605-13. 225. Thiele RH, Rea KM, Turrentine FE, Friel CM, Hassinger TE, McMurry TL, et al. Standardization of care: impact of an enhanced recovery protocol on length of stay, complications, and direct costs after colorectal surgery. J Am Coll Surg 2015;220:430-43. 226. Makaryus R, Miller TE, Gan TJ. Current concepts of fluid management in enhanced recovery pathways. Br J Anaesth 2018;120:376-83. 227. Kim Y, Gani F, Spolverato G, Ejaz A, Xu L, Buettner S, et al. Variation in crystalloid administration: an analysis of 6248 patients undergoing major elective surgery. J Surg Res 2016;203:368-77. 228. Lilot M, Ehrenfeld JM, Lee C, Harrington B, Cannesson M, Rinehart J. Variability in practice and factors predictive of total crystalloid administration during abdominal surgery: retrospective two-centre analysis. Br J Anaesth 2015;114:767-76. 229. Gonzalez-Fajardo JA, Mengibar L, Brizuela JA, Castrodeza J, Vaquero-Puerta C. Effect of postoperative restrictive fluid therapy in the recovery of patients with abdominal vascular surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2009;37:538-43. 230. McArdle GT, McAuley DF, McKinley A, Blair P, Hoper M, Harkin DW. Preliminary results of a prospective randomized trial of restrictive versus standard fluid regime in elective open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Surg 2009;250:28-34. 231. Piljic D, Petricevic M, Piljic D, Ksela J, Robic B, Klokocovnik T. Restrictive versus standard fluid regimen in elective minilaparotomy abdominal aortic repairdprospective randomized controlled trial. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2016;64:296-303. 232. Toomtong P, Suksompong S. Intravenous fluids for abdominal aortic surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;1:CD000991. 233. Wald R, Waikar SS, Liangos O, Pereira BJG, Chertow GM, Jaber BL. Acute renal failure after endovascular vs open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg 2006;43:460-6; discussion: 466. 234. Nonaka T, Kimura N, Hori D, Sasabuchi Y, Nakano M, Yuri K, et al. Predictors of acute kidney injury following elective open and endovascular aortic repair for abdominal aortic aneurysm. Ann Vasc Dis 2018;11:298-305. 235. Dang T, Dakour-Aridi H, Rizwan M, Nejim B, Malas MB. Predictors of acute kidney injury after infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in octogenarians. J Vasc Surg 2019;69:752-62.e1. 236. Gould CV, Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Kuntz G, Pegues DA. Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for prevention of catheter-associated urinary tract infections 2009. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31: 319-26. 237. Ladak SS, Katznelson R, Muscat M, Sawhney M, Beattie WS, O・Leary G. Incidence of urinary retention in patients with thoracic patient-controlled epidural analgesia (TPCEA) undergoing thoracotomy. Pain Manag Nurs 2009;10:94-8. 238. De Leon LE, Patil N, Hartigan PM, White A, Bravo-Iniguez CE, Fox S, et al. Risk of urinary recatheterization for thoracic surgical patients with epidural anesthesia. J Surg Res (Houst) 2020;3:163-71. 239. Subramaniam B, Panzica PJ, Novack V, Mahmood F, Matyal R, Mitchell JD, et al. Continuous perioperative insulin infusion decreases major cardiovascular events in patients undergoing vascular surgery: a prospective, randomized trial. Anesthesiology 2009;110:970-7. 240. Long CA, Fang ZB, Hu FY, Arya S, Brewster LP, Duggan E, et al. Poor glycemic control is a strong predictor of postoperative morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2019;69:1219-26. 241. Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group, Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, Goff DC Jr, Bigger JT, et al. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545-59. 242. NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Liu B, Chittock DR, Norton R, Myburgh JA, et al. Hypoglycemia and risk of death in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2012;367:1108-18. 243. Duwayri Y, Jordan WD Jr. Diabetes, dysglycemia, and vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2020;71:701-11. 244. Stethen TW, Ghazi YA, Heidel RE, Daley BJ, Barnes L, Patterson D, et al. Walking to recovery: the effects of missed ambulation events on postsurgical recovery after bowel resection. J Gastrointest Oncol 2018;9:953-61. 245. Kalisch BJ, Lee S, Dabney BW. Outcomes of inpatient mobilization: a literature review. J Clin Nurs 2014;23:1486-501. 246. Schallom M, Tymkew H, Vyers K, Prentice D, Sona C, Norris T, et al. Implementation of an interdisciplinary AACN early mobility protocol. Crit Care Nurse 2020;40:e7-17. 247. Fiore JF Jr, Bialocerkowski A, Browning L, Faragher IG, Denehy L. Criteria to determine readiness for hospital discharge following colorectal surgery: an international consensus using the Delphi technique. Dis Colon Rectum 2012;55:416-23. 248. Rosen SF, Clagett GP, Valentine RJ, Jackson MR, Modrall JG, McIntyre KE. Transient advanced mental impairment: an underappreciated morbidity after aortic surgery. J Vasc Surg 2002;35:376-81. 249. Tahhan G, Farber A, Shah NK, Krafcik BM, Sachs TE, Kalish JA, et al. Characterization of planned and unplanned 30-day readmissions following vascular surgical procedures. Vasc Endovascular Surg 2017;51:17-22. 250. Knighton A, Martin G, Sounderajah V, Warren L, Markiewicz O, Riga C, et al. Avoidable 30-day readmissions in patients undergoing vascular surgery. BJS Open 2019;3:759-66. 251. Eun JC, Nehler MR, Black JH III, Glebova NO. Measures to reduce unplanned readmissions after vascular surgery. Semin Vasc Surg 2015;28:103-11. 252. Brooke BS, De Martino RR, Girotti M, Dimick JB, Goodney PP. Developing strategies for predicting and preventing readmissions in vascular surgery. J Vasc Surg 2012;56:556-62. Journal of Vascular Surgery McGinigle et al 1819 Volume 75, Number 6 253. Johnson A, Sandford J, Tyndall J. Written and verbal information versus verbal information only for patients being discharged from acute hospital settings to home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;4:CD003716. 254. Li LT, Mills WL, Gutierrez AM, Herman LI, Berger DH, Naik AD. A patient-centered early warning system to prevent readmission after colorectal surgery: a national consensus using the Delphi method. J Am Coll Surg 2013;216:210-6.e6. 255. Mistiaen P, Poot E. Telephone follow-up, initiated by a hospitalbased health professional, for postdischarge problems in patients discharged from hospital to home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;4:CD004510. 256. Brooke BS, Stone DH, Cronenwett JL, Nolan B, DeMartino RR, MacKenzie TA, et al. Early primary care provider follow-up and readmission after high-risk surgery. JAMA Surg 2014;149:821-8. 257. Ripolles-Melchor J, Ramirez-Rodriguez JM, Casans-Frances R, Aldecoa C, Abad-Motos A, Logrono-Egea M, et al. Association between use of enhanced recovery after surgery protocol and postoperative complications in colorectal surgery: the postoperative outcomes within enhanced recovery after surgery protocol (POWER) study. JAMA Surg 2019;154:725-36. 258. Currie A, Soop M, Demartines N, Fearon K, Kennedy R, Ljungqvist O. Enhanced recovery after surgery interactive audit system: 10 years・ experience with an international web-based clinical and research perioperative care database. Clin Colon Rectal Surg 2019;32:75-81. 259. Gustafsson UO, Hausel J, Thorell A, Ljungqvist O, Soop M, Nygren J, et al. Adherence to the enhanced recovery after surgery protocol and outcomes after colorectal cancer surgery. Arch Surg 2011;146: 571-7. 260. Bisch SP, Wells T, Gramlich L, Faris P, Wang X, Tran DT, et al. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) in gynecologic oncology: system-wide implementation and audit leads to improved value and patient outcomes. Gynecol Oncol 2018;151:117-23. 261. de Groot JJA, van Es LEJM, Maessen JMC, Dejong CHC, Kruitwagen RFPM, Slangen BFM. Diffusion of enhanced recovery principles in gynecologic oncology surgery: is active implementation still necessary? Gynecol Oncol 2014;134:570-5. 262. Cakir H, van Stijn MF, Lopes Cardozo AM, Langenhorst BL, Schreurs WH, van der Ploeg TJ, et al. Adherence to enhanced recovery after surgery and length of stay after colonic resection. Colorectal Dis 2013;15:1019-25. 263. Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters, Apfelbaum JL, Connis RT, Nickinovich DG. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation; Pasternak LR, et al. Practice advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists task force on preanesthesia evaluation. Anesthesiology 2012;116:522-38. 264. Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, Hornbake ER, Lawrence VA, Smetana GW, et al. Risk assessment for and strategies to reduce perioperative pulmonary complications for patients undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:575-80. 265. Expert Panel on Thoracic Imaging, McComb BL, Chung JH, Crabtree TD, Heitkamp DE, Iannettoni MD, et al. ACR Appropriateness Criteria routine chest radiography. J Thorac Imaging 2016;31: W13-5. 266. Yokota S, Koizumi M, Togashi K, Morimoto M, Yasuda Y, Sata N, et al. Preoperative pulmonary function tests do not predict the development of pulmonary complications after elective major abdominal surgery: a prospective cohort study. Int J Surg 2020;73:65-71. 267. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Practice advisory for preanesthesia evaluation: a report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology 2002;96:485-96. 268. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Routine preoperative tests for elective surgery. Available at: https://www.nice.org. uk/guidance/ng45. Accessed December 10, 2020. 269. Ho P, Ting AC, Cheng SW. Blood loss and transfusion in elective abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery. ANZ J Surg 2004;74:631-4. 270. Matsumura JS, Katzen BT, Sullivan TM, Dake MD, Naftel DC; Excluder Bifurcated Endoprosthesis Investigators. Predictors of survival following open and endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc Surg 2009;23:153-8. 271. van Hendriks Y, Romme J, der Slegt J, van Veen EJ, der Laan L, Kluytmans J. Implementation of a bundle of care to reduce surgical site infections in patients undergoing vascular surgery. PLoS One 2013;8:e71566. 272. Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K. Preoperative hair removal to reduce surgical site infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;11: CD004122. 273. Leaper D, Burman-Roy S, Palanca A, Cullen K, Worster D, GautamAitken E, et al. Prevention and treatment of surgical site infection: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 2008;337:a1924. 274. Darouiche RO, Wall MJ Jr, Itani KM, Otterson MF, Webb AL, Carrick MM, et al. Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidone-iodine for surgical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med 2010;362:18-26. 275. Earnshaw JJ, Berridge DC, Slack RC, Makin GS, Hopkinson BR. Do preoperative chlorhexidine baths reduce the risk of infection after vascular reconstruction? Eur J Vasc Surg 1989;3:323-6. 276. Fernandez-Prada M, Martinez-Ortega C, Revuelta-Marino L, Menendez-Herrero A, Navarro-Gracia JF. Evaluation of the bundle "zero surgical site infection" to prevent surgical site infection in vascular surgery. Ann Vasc Surg 2017;41:160-8. 277. Ljungqvist O, de Boer HD, Balfour A, Fawcett WJ, Lobo DN, Nelson G, et al. Opportunities and challenges for the next phase of enhanced recovery after surgery: a review. JAMA Surg 2021;156:775-84. Submitted Dec 15, 2021; accepted Jan 3, 2022. 1820 McGinigle et al Journal of Vascular Surgery June 2022