See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342239904
Using a Mobile Application for Real-Time Collection of Patient-Reported
Outcomes in Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery within an ERAS® Pathway
Article in The American surgeon · August 2019
DOI: 10.1177/000313481908500847
CITATIONS READS
26 214
13 authors, including:
Allyson Cochran John Martinie
Atrium Health Wake Forest University
97 PUBLICATIONS 525 CITATIONS 322 PUBLICATIONS 5,265 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Dionisios Vrochides
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
372 PUBLICATIONS 2,874 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Allyson Cochran on 24 June 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.Using a Mobile Application for Real-Time
Collection of Patient-Reported Outcomes in
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery within
(cid:1)
an ERAS Pathway
RYANPICKENS,M.D.,*ALLYSONCOCHRAN,M.S.P.H.,†KENDRATEZBER,M.S.N.,R.N.,C.N.L.,*RENNABERRY,‡
EMILYBHATTACHARYA,§DENICEKOO,M.S.,§LACEYKING,R.N.,*DAVIDA.IANNITTI,M.D.,*
JOHNB.MARTINIE,M.D.,*ERINH.BAKER,M.D.,*LEEM.OCUIN,M.D.,*JARRETTHUNT,M.S.,‡
DIONISIOSVROCHIDES,M.D.,PH.D.
From the *Division of HPB Surgery, Department of Surgery, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North Carolina;
†Department of Surgery, Atrium Health, Carolinas Center for Surgical Outcomes Science, Charlotte, North
Carolina; ‡Information and Analytics Services, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North Carolina; and
(cid:1)
§SeamlessMD , Toronto, Canada
Patient-reported outcomes (PROs) are essential for patient-centered health care. This pilot study
implemented a mobile application customized to an hepatopancreatobiliary Enhanced Recovery
After Surgery (ERAS(cid:1)) program—a novel environment—for real-time collection of PROs, in-
cludingERAS(cid:1)pathwaycompliance.Patientsundergoinghepatectomy,distalpancreatectomy,or
pancreaticoduodenectomy through the ERAS(cid:1) program were prospectively enrolled over
10 months. The application provided education and questionnaires before surgery through
30 days postdischarge. Thresholds were set for initial adoption of the application (75%), PRO
responserate(50%),andpatientsatisfaction (75%).Dailypostdischargehealthchecksintegrated
customized responses to guide out-of-hospital care. Of 165 enrolled patients, 122 met inclusion
criteria.Applicationadoptionwas93percent(114/122)andin-hospitalengagementremainedhigh
at 88 per cent (107/122). Patients completed 62 per cent of PRO on quality of life, postoperative
pain, nausea, opioid consumption, and compliance to ERAS(cid:1) pathway items, including ambu-
lation and breathing exercises. During postcharge tracking, 12 patients reported that the appli-
cation prevented a phone call to the hospital and three patients reported prevention of an
emergencyroomvisit.PROcollectionthrough thismobiledevice createdanintegratedplatform
for comprehensive perioperative care, patient-initiated outcome tracking with automatic report-
ing, and real-time feedback for process change. Improving proactive outpatient management of
complex patients through mobile technology could help restructure health-care delivery and
improve resource utilization for all patients.
E NHANCED RECOVERY AFTER Surgery (ERAS(cid:1)) is surgical specialties, including hepatopancreatobiliary
a comprehensive multidisciplinary approach to (HPB), has demonstrated similar improvements in
the entire perioperative period for reducing physio- postsurgical length of stay and morbidity without
logic stress and improving patient recovery through compromising readmission rate, morbidity, or mortal-
standardized evidence-based multimodal practices.1 ity3,4andERAS(cid:1)consensusguidelinesnowexistfor
ERAS(cid:1)programswerethefirstestablishedcolorectal major pancreas5 and liver operations.6
surgeryandhaveconsistentlydemonstratedsignificant Simply implementing an institutional enhanced re-
improvementsinloweringpostoperativemorbidityand covery protocol, however, does not itself guarantee
reducing hospital length of stay.2 Expansion to other improvement in outcomes. A clear correlation has
been demonstrated between increased compliance to
ERAS(cid:1) pathway measures and improved clinical
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dionisios outcomes.7 Notably, the greatest improvement related
Vrochides,M.D.,Ph.D,DivisionofHPBSurgery,Departmentof
to compliance has been shown with protocol steps
Surgery,AtriumHealth,CarolinasMedicalCenter,1025Morehead
dependent on active patient engagement.8 A founda-
MedicalDrive,Suite600,Charlotte,NC28204.E-mail:Dionisios.
vrochides@atriumhealth.org. tional component to successful ERAS(cid:1) programs,
909910 THE AMERICAN SURGEON August 2019 Vol. 85
therefore, is institutional tracking of compliance to hepatectomy.Thestudydesignandmethodologywere
pathway items through continuous auditing and rig- approved as a quality improvement initiative by the
orous adjustment of implementation strategies to institutional review board.
generate improved outcomes.1,9
Unfortunately, multiple barriers typically exist at
Mobile Application
an institutional level, which create unique chal-
lenges to effective implementation and auditing of An established mobile application developed by
an ERAS(cid:1) program. Sufficient data collection for SeamlessMD(cid:1) (Seamless Mobile Health Inc., Mon-
meaningful analysis requires allocation of limited treal, Canada) was customized to the ERAS(cid:1) pro-
resourcesandcanimpedetheclinicalresponsibilities grams for the division of HPB at Carolinas Medical
of the already burdened care providers. Patient edu- Center. The application is a web-based platform ac-
cation and active participation are also crucial for cessible by any smartphone and tablet device and is
much of the perioperative plan; however, dynamic available at no charge to the patients. The application
feedbackfromthepatientperspectiveisoftenlimited. providesapatient-andsurgeon-specificportaltotheir
Finally, traditional measures for outcome tracking individual perioperative surgical plan guided by the
(e.g., questionnaires, chart review, and phone in- established ERAS(cid:1) pathway. Preoperatively, patients
terviews) require extensive time for collection and are provided with scheduled task reminders for both
analysis with most conclusions out-of-date before general preoperative preparation (e.g., reminders to
they can be reported. keep exercising and eating healthy before surgery)
Patient-reported outcomes (PROs) have been well and presurgery anxiety and quality-of-life benchmark
validated for measuring patient experience during surveys, as well as specific ERAS(cid:1) pathway steps,
perioperative care and are becoming foundational in including no food past midnight and drinking the
the growing movement toward patient-centered recommended carbohydrate drink two hours before
care.10,11 However, not until recently have they been surgery. Patients are also prompted to access a cus-
recognized as a novel strategy for tracking clinical tomizeddigitaleducationallibraryreviewingdetailsof
outcomes as well using the patient’s perspective and their medical condition, scheduled operation, and an-
initiative.12 In addition, with the exponential rise in ticipated ERAS(cid:1) expectations. All educational mate-
mobilepatient-centeredelectronicplatformsforhealth rials were developed in collaboration with the HPB
care,theopportunitytoleveragetechnologytoengage providers to reflect the material provided in the stan-
and educate patients throughout their entire peri- dardizedpreoperativeERAS(cid:1)educationalclassesand
operative journey while simultaneously reporting and was verified as low literacy English at 6th-grade level
tracking patient participation in clinical outcome according to the Flesch-Kinkaid readability test.
measures (such as ERAS(cid:1) pathway items) offers an Beginning on the day of surgery, the application
unprecedented opportunity. Recently, Pecorelli and then provides prompts to complete daily surveys to
colleagues first described the use of a mobile appli- track symptoms, opiate use, anxiety and quality-of-
cation for PRO collection specifically within an life scores, and ERAS(cid:1) pathway compliance. These
ERAS(cid:1)program forcolorectalsurgery; however,this surveys are prompted daily in hospital and after dis-
concept has yet to be explored for the often decondi- chargeuntil30dayspostoperatively.Attheendofthe
tioned and comorbid HPB population undergoing 30-daystudy period, patients are askedto complete a
major abdominal surgery. Therefore, we aim to dem- survey to assess their impression and likelihood to
onstrate the novel implementation of an established recommend the application. After discharge, patients
mobile health application for PRO collection in an are also prompted to complete daily health checks
ERAS(cid:1) program for HPB surgery. to monitor symptoms at home. Responses to preset
questions trigger recommendations customized spe-
Methods cifically by the HPB surgeons for education and re-
assurance, guidance for continued self-care at home,
Study Design
directions to call the HPB office nurse, or instruction
This investigation is a prospective, single-group, to seek immediate medical attention at the nearest
pilot study at a large tertiary HPB center. Patients ED.
aged 18 years or older, who were scheduled for elec- All patient-reported data were stored in the app-
tive surgery within an established ERAS(cid:1) program lication’s secure database and transmitted via
in our institutional HPB service, were eligible for secure encryption to secure HIPAA-compliant Seam-
participation. Three ERAS(cid:1) programs for HPB oper- lessMD(cid:1) servers. Deidentified data were used to
ations were ongoing at the time of the study for generate regular reports, which were provided to the
pancreaticoduodenectomy, distal pancreatectomy, and HPB service to track progress during the pilot study.Patient Enrollment andEducation Statistical Analysis
All patients scheduled for eligible operations under Statistical analysis was performed using Stata
ERAS(cid:1) protocols were introduced to the pilot study (Version 13, StataCorp, College Station, TX). De-
at their standard preoperative ERAS(cid:1) education ap- scriptivedatawere reportedasmean[95%confidence
pointment. Patients who were elected to enroll pro- interval] or median IQR. Categorical variables were
vided informed consent for participation. All patients, comparedusingchi-squaredanalysis.APvalue<0.05
regardlessofenrollmentinthepilot,weretreatedwith was considered statistically significant.
thestandardofcarewithsmall-groupmultidisciplinary
counseling at the preoperative class and hard-copy
materialsgiventoallpatientsintheERAS(cid:1)program. Results
For patients who elected to enroll, a detailed de- Patient Participation
scription of the study was provided by the ERAS(cid:1)
PatientswereenrolledinthepilotstudyfromMarch
nurse leader and a hands-on tutorial on how to down-
27 through December 31, 2018. Figure 1 shows the
load and navigate the application. All patients were
flowchart for patient selection and exclusion. During
instructed to use their personal mobile device for the
the pilot, 213 patients were eligible with 165 (77%)
application before and after surgery. The application elected to enroll at their preoperative ERAS(cid:1) educa-
was also designed as a tool for use by all members of
tion class. All patients whose operations were aborted
the patient’s support system; therefore, patients were before or at the time of surgery (n 4 27) or had not
encouraged to involve their family and/or friends to
completedthe30-daypostoperativeperiodbeforedata
enterintheirresponsesintotheapplicationatanytime
during their recovery. Patients were seen daily by the
ERAS(cid:1)nurseleaderandprovidedencouragementand
any assistance with using the application throughout
their hospital recovery. On discharge, the patients
continued to receive daily surveys at home or reha-
bilitationfacilitybytheapplicationuntilpostoperative
day(POD)30,aswellasaccesstoeducationalmaterial
on recovery issues.
Outcomes
Theprimaryintentwastoevaluatetheapplication’s
ability to capture and track PROs in real time and
patient’sresponsivenesstotheapplication.Therefore,
primary outcome measures and minimum success
metricswereestablishedforpatientadoption(logging
in and completing at least one PRO after enrollment)
at $ 75 per cent, overall PRO response rate at $ 50
per cent, and patient satisfaction as defined by pa-
tient’s recommendation of the application to others
at$75percent.Thesecondaryintentwastoevaluate
the application’s ability to capture and track spe-
cific responses for traditional PROs, including post-
operative pain, nausea, and opiate use, as well as
nontraditional PROs for compliance to ERAS(cid:1)
pathway items in the preoperative and postopera-
tive phases. Quality-of-life assessments were in-
tegrated into the scheduled survey prompts using the
abbreviated Quality of Recovery (QoR-15)13 and
PROsMeasurementInformationSystem(PROMIS)14
surveys both of which have been well validated
in surgical populations.15,16 Patient responses to
postdischarge health checks and actions prompted by
the application and/or HPB clinical staff were also
tracked.
ylno
roloc
bew
No. 8 MOBILE APPLICATION FOR PROS IN HPB SURGERY ? Pickens et al. 911
FIG. 1. Flowchart for patient selection and exclusion.* Un-
dergoing scheduled pancreaticoduodenectomy, hepatectomy, or
distalpancreatectomyunderERAS(cid:1)program.analysis were excluded. At the conclusion of the pilot complianceremainedabovegoal(>50%)in aggregate
period, 122 patients had completed the entire 30-day and individually for all but one of the benchmark
postoperative study period and were included in the surveys.The30-dayend-of-studyPROMISsurveywas
study. completed by 41 per cent of participants (just below
theindividual50%target);however,surprisinglymore
than 30 per cent were still engaging with the applica-
Adoption and Engagement
tion at 90 days after surgery to complete the same
Patient adoption and engagement with the applica- PROMIS survey despite this being outside of the 30-
tion is shown in Figure 2. Patient adoption was high day study period.
with 93 per cent (114/122) of enrolled patients using Table 2 reports responses regarding patient satis-
theapplicationatleastoncebeforesurgery.Immediate faction with the application. The response rates were
postoperativeengagementremainedhighat88percent somewhat low; however, of the collected responses,
(107/122). Engagement at after discharge showed the thesatisfactionratewasveryhighwith86percent(43/
highest decline in participation yet still remained 50) recommending the application. Responders also
above 50 per cent (63/122). Health check-ins per- indicated that the application helped 97 per cent (29/
formed after discharge demonstrated high retention 30) “feel more prepared for surgery” and allowed 78
through the remainder of the postdischarge period. per cent (69/88) to “feel more confident” and “worry
less” during their recovery in the hospital or after
Patient Reported Outcomes discharge. The application also successfully tracked
traditional patient-reported data for opiate use, pain,
During the study period, patients submitted 540 of
and nausea daily up to 30 days after surgery (Fig. 3).
944 prompted PROs for an overall PRO response
By the completion of the pilot, we also successfully
rate of 57 per cent. Table 1 shows a breakdown of
implemented a pathway for immediately uploading
PRO response categories for specific preoperative, in-
individual patient-reported pain and nausea scores to
hospital, and postdischarge questionnaires. Survey
the electronic medical record (EMR) which could be
used to make real-time interventions.
PROs for ERAS Compliance
Table 3 shows the patient-reported data for compli-
ance to the institutional ERAS(cid:1) protocol for HPB
surgery. Patients successfully reported compliance to
postoperative questions for ambulation, breathing ex-
ercises, and time spent in bed. Participation in com-
pliancesurveyswaslowestonPOD1forbothliverand
pancreassurgeriesbutremainedstablethroughPOD7.
Postdischarge Health Tracking
Table 4 displays the patient responses to post-
discharge health checks and subsequent recommen-
dations provided by the application and/or the HPB
nursing staff. During the pilot, patients submitted 521
health checks to track their recovery and symptom
ylno
roloc
bew
912 THE AMERICAN SURGEON August 2019 Vol. 85
FIG.2. EngagementwithSeamlessMD(cid:1)applicationthrough-
outtheperioperativeperiod.
TABLE1. PROsSurveyParticipation
Survey Responses(Liver) Responses(Pancreas) Responses(Total) Goal
Tailoryourprogram(presurgery) 62%(29/47) 74%(66/89) 70%(95/136) $50%
In-hospitalhealthcheck 57%(26/46) 57%(48/84) 57%(74/130) $50%
QoR-15a(14dayspresurgery) 57%(27/47) 60%(52/86) 59%(79/133) $50%
QoR-15a(3dayspostsurgery) 57%(26/46) 54%(44/81) 55%(70/127) $50%
PROMISb(30dayspostsurgery) 45%(20/44) 39%(28/72) 41%(48/116) $50%
PROMISb*(90dayspostsurgery) 31%(11/36) 31%(16/52) 31%(27/88) –
* The PROMIS survey at 90 days was sent to patients but not included in the analysis of 30-day results for overall survey
participation.
aQoR-15,QualityofRecovery15questionsurvey,bPROMIS,PatientReportedOutcomeMeasurementInformationSystem.TABLE2. PatientExperienceSurveyResponseRates
PercentofPatientswho… TotalResponse
wouldrecommendtheapplication 86%(43/50)
felttheapplicationhelpedthemfeelmorepreparedforsurgery 97%(29/302)
felttheapplicationmadethemmoreconfidentabouttakingcareofthemselvesaftersurgery 78%(69/88)
felttheapplicationhelpedthemworrylessaftersurgery 78%(69/88)
progress after discharge. Of these total responders, 12 provide reassurance for 167 responses and guide 226
patients reported that the applicationprevented one or responses to further self-care educational resources
more phone calls to the office and three patients re- immediately accessible on the hand-held application.
ported the application prevented a visit to the ED be- In addition, the application instructed patients to call
cause of reassurance from the application’s responses the HPB office nurse for 121 responses and directed
torecoveryquestions.Conversely,postdischargehealth seven patients to seek immediate medical care at the
checks were triaged by the customized application to nearest ED.
ylno
roloc
bew
No. 8 MOBILE APPLICATION FOR PROS IN HPB SURGERY ? Pickens et al. 913
FIG.3. PROsforopiateconsumption,pain,andnauseathrough30dayspostoperatively.914 THE AMERICAN SURGEON August 2019 Vol. 85
TABLE3. Patient-ReportedCompliancetoERAS(cid:1)PathwayItemsBeginningtheDayafterSurgery
ERAS(cid:1)ItemQuestion* POD1 POD2 POD3 POD4 POD5 POD6 POD7
(Compliancedefinition) (n422) (n436) (n425) (n425) (n425) (n427) (n423)
Didyoudoallyourbreathingexercises
yesterday?(Compliance4“Yes,Idid
themall”)
Pancreassurgery 2/11 14/26 7/20 10/21 10/21 7/22 10/17
Liversurgery 4/11 4/10 2/5 1/4 3/4 2/5 2/6
Howmanywalksdidyoutakeyesterday
(Compliance4“4ormorewalks”)
Pancreassurgery 0/11 0/26 13/20 12/21 4/21 11/22 8/17
Liversurgery 0/11 0/10 0/5 0/4 1/4 3/5 3/6
Howmuchtimedidyouspendoutof
bedyesterday?(Compliance44or
morehours)
Pancreassurgery 0/11 17/26 11/20 14/21 12/21 11/22 10/17
Liversurgery 0/11 5/10 2/5 1/4 1/4 2/5 3/6
* Questions were prompted in open-ended format with multiple-choice options; however, compliance was set as a binary
outcomedefineduniquelyaslistedbeloweachquestion.
TABLE4. PostdischargeHealthCheckTriageResponsesandAlerts
Patient-ReportedReductioninHealth-CareVisits ResponseFrequency,n415
“Applicationpreventedoneormorephonecallstotheoffice” 12
“ApplicationpreventedoneormorevisitstotheED 3
Healthcheckalerttype AlertFrequencyn4521
“On-track”(Noissues) 167
“Trytheseself-caretips”(customizededucationprovided) 226
“Callyournurse” 121
“GototheED” 7
AlertssenttoHPBnurse(September–December2018only) GuidanceProvidedn427
ReassuranceorSelf-care 10
Clinicappointmentscheduled 8
DirectedpatienttoEDimmediately 9
Duringthefinalfourmonthsofthepilot(September– postdischarge recovery outcomes as well as compli-
December 2018), all patient health checks, which ance to ERAS(cid:1) pathway items without additional
prompted patients to seek medical advice or immediate resource utilization. Patient enrollment, adoption
care,werealsosentdirectlytoanHPBnursepractitioner before, surgery, and engagement in the immediate
for further investigation through a phone call to the pa- postoperative settings were excellent, and ongoing
tient (n 4 27) (Table 4). Ten patients were provided retention after discharge through the 30-day study pe-
direct guidance for further self-care, eight patients were riod remained high. Patients reported high satisfaction
scheduled for a clinic appointment, and nine patients with the application, and most agreed that this mobile
were instructed to go to the ED for urgent evaluation. platformwasbeneficialduringhospitalrecoveryandat
home before and after surgery. Finally, postdischarge
health checks facilitated not only a novel method for
Discussion
ongoing mobile PRO collection but also created an in-
Thisisthefirstprospectivepilotstudyevaluatingthe tegrated triage system to improve real-time monitoring
implementation of a mobile application in an HPB and guidance during recovery at home.
surgeryERAS(cid:1)programasacomprehensiveplatform Emphasis on adopting enhanced recovery programs
for real-time capture of PROs throughout the en- have been frequently focused on producing the well-
tire perioperative course. The customized application demonstrated reduction in lengths of stay, cost, and
provided patients with aservice-specific perioperative morbiditywhichareoftentheprimarybenchmarksfor
guide to facilitate patient education, track symptom new adopters of ERAS(cid:1) programs. A comprehensive
experience and management, and remind patients of perspective of recovery, however, requires addressing
daily recovery steps. Simultaneously, the application the complexdynamic of convalescence for restoration
enabled patient-driven reporting of in-hospital and of a patient’s physical, emotional, social, and evenNo. 8 MOBILE APPLICATION FOR PROS IN HPB SURGERY ? Pickens et al. 915
economic well-being. Enhanced recovery guidelines PRO specifically in an enhanced recovery program
haveconsistentlystressedtheimportanceofmeasuring was performed in colorectal surgery.12 In addition to
and tracking all such outcomes of recovery, which traditionalPROsforsymptoms(e.g.,pain,nausea,and
remainsakeydistinctionbetweenERAS(cid:1)andpurely bowel function scores), this study also evaluated the
fast-track protocols.5,6,17–19 PROs are becoming well use of a mobile PRO platform to specifically track
recognized as an essential tool in the era of patient- compliance to ERAS(cid:1) pathway items by patient self-
centered care for understanding the full impact of dis- audit.Notably,inthisstudy,however,patientswerenot
ease and recovery;10 however, unfortunately, their use provided access to the application until the day of
remains limited, particularly in enhanced recovery surgeryandresponseswereonlycollecteduntiltheday
programs.AsystematicreviewbyNevilleetal.20on38 of discharge, limiting scope of PRO collection, and
studies on enhanced recovery programs reported that tracking of the entire recovery period. Patients were
patient-reportedsymptoms,long-termfunctionalstatus, also only able to access the application on devices
andimpactonqualityoflifewereconsistentlyreported provided by the study. Consequently, the mobile ap-
less than short-term physical recovery and most com- plication served primarily as an alternate mode for
monly through provider observations. They concluded capturing PRO collection and ERAS compliance dur-
that PRO should be used to assist in tracking recovery ing hospitalization only.
throughallperioperative phases tomore accurately the Before our pilot study, no published investigation
patient’sassessmentoftheirmultidimensionalrecovery. has evaluated the implementation of a mobile patient-
ThevalueofPROcollectionmaybeevengreaterin reporting application within the HPB population to
HPB surgery, particularly when performed in con- track both patient experience as well as ERAS(cid:1)
junction with ERAS(cid:1) protocols. The significant pathway compliance. We intentionally allowed pa-
morbidity and mortality associated with both the dis- tients to participate through any preferred personal
ease process and major abdominal HPB operations device, which enabled a fully mobile experience.
suggest that a more comprehensive understanding Consequently, this facilitated the use of a single plat-
of different patient’s preoperative preparedness and form for integrated PRO collection throughout the
postoperative recovery through PROs could influence entire perioperative period with access to preopera-
theirperioperativecaredelivery.Inaprospectivestudy tive educational materials and checklists, in-hospital
by Day et al.,21 validated PROs performed at pre- tracking, and continued postdischarge surveys.
operative and postoperative ERAS(cid:1) clinic visits for The very high adoption noted in our study is con-
patients undergoing liver resection for malignancy sistent with the results seen in other mobile platform
demonstrated the ability of PROs to track functional studies.12 Patients in our study were not excluded for
recovery. They also specifically demonstrated that age or experience level with using mobile technology,
enhanced recovery protocols were independently as- yet 77 per cent of patients enrolled, suggesting that
sociatedwithimprovedrecoveryasmeasuredbythese most patients are amenable to incorporating patient-
PROs and that improved patient-reported recovery for centered technology into their surgical care experi-
ERAS(cid:1) patients was associated with higher rates of ence.Despitethehighmorbidityassociatedwithmajor
return to oncologic therapy, an underappreciated but HPBoperations,aremarkable88percentcontinuedto
critical metric after oncologic resection. engage with the application during their hospitaliza-
This study also highlights the power of harnessing tion. The most notable decline in patient engagement
emerging mobile health technology to facilitate both occurred after discharge as would be expected, al-
patient-specific and population data tracking without though participation still remained above the 50 per
increasing the burden on care providers. Traditional cent target with high retention through the conclusion
collection of PROs typically implies direct patient of the study period. This represents the first study to
questioning during hospitalization, clinic visits, or our knowledge to successfully track postdischarge
telephone surveys, which can result in a significant PRO captured daily through a patient-directed mobile
challenge for sustainability because of need for dedi- application outside of the clinical environment.
catedtime,resources,andpersonnel.Inaddition,inthe The postdischarge impact of this application holds
present era of real-time data-driven process change, possibly the greatest potential for revolutionizing the
information obtained through traditional PRO is often delivery of perioperative care. Previous electronic-
obsolete because of the inherent delay in collection, based patient applications have demonstrated promis-
analysis, and reporting. Efforts to streamline this pro- ingresultsforpostdischargemonitoring;4,24–27however,
cess have driven the development of mobile appli- none have attempted to combine patient-driven track-
cation platforms for PRO input directly by the ing through the entire perioperative experience using
patients.22,23 The first prospective usability study on the same mobile platform. The SeamlessMD(cid:1) appli-
implementation of a mobile application to capture cation infrastructure was developed for continuous916 THE AMERICAN SURGEON August 2019 Vol. 85
data download,analysis,andassimilationofPROinto integration of PRO into existing predictive modeling
the EMR. Within the last several months of the pilot, may help to more accurately identify patients at the
we successfully incorporated a digital pathway to the highest risk for poor recovery and be used to allocate
EMR patient dashboard for real-time displays of pain prehabilitation resources appropriately.
and nausea scores collected by the application. Simi-
larly, an automatic alert system for all postdischarge
Acknowledgments
health checks that prompt patients to contact their
medical providers is being integrated into the same GerriChadwick,AuD—MedicalWriter,CarolinasCenter
EMR interface to improve communication with pa- forSurgicalOutcomesScience,CarolinasMedicalCenter.
tients regarding these concerns.
In the digital era, use of an application on a hand-
REFERENCES
held device to collect PROs is not only feasible but
1. LjungqvistO,ScottM,FearonKC.Enhancedrecoveryafter
shouldberecognizedasnearlyessentialforimproving
surgery:areview.JAMASurg2017;152:292–8.
the surgical care of patients. A comprehensive mobile 2. Greco M, Capretti G, Beretta L, et al. Enhanced recovery
healthplatformsuchastheonedescribedinthisstudy program in colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized
can dramatically transform patient care by allowing controlledtrials.WorldJSurg2014;38:1531–41.
continuousaccesstotwo-waycommunicationbetween 3. Coolsen MME, van Dam RM, van der Wilt AA, et al. Sys-
patients and the surgical team, facilitating earlier in- tematicreviewandmeta-analysisofenhancedrecoveryafterpancre-
tervention on warning signs provided by patients in aticsurgerywithparticularemphasisonpancreaticoduodenectomies.
realtimeandimprovingpatientengagementwiththeir WorldJSurg2013;37:1909–18.
4. VisioniA,ShahR,GabrielE,etal.Enhancedrecoveryafter
own care every day. Furthermore, the ramifications of
surgeryfornoncolorectalsurgery?Asystematicreviewandmeta-
improving proactive outpatient management of com-
analysisofmajorabdominalsurgery.AnnSurg2018;267:57–65.
plex patients through mobile technology could help
5. Lassen K,Coolsen MM, Slim K, et al. Guidelines for peri-
restructure health care and improve resource utiliza-
operative care for pancreaticoduodenectomy: enhanced recovery
tion for all patients. aftersurgery(ERAS(cid:1))societyrecommendations.ClinNutr2012;
31:817–30.
6. Melloul E, Hu¨bner M, Scott M, et al. Guidelines for peri-
Limitations
operative care for liver surgery: enhanced recovery after sur-
The specific results of this study have limited gery(ERAS)societyrecommendations.WorldJSurg2016;40:
generalizability because of its small sample size, 2425–40.
patient selection, and resources required for initial 7. MessengerDE,CurtisNJ,JonesA,etal.Factorspredicting
mobileplatformlaunching.However,adoptionofthis outcome from enhanced recovery programmes in laparoscopic
platform to other service lines and hospital systems colorectal surgery: a systematic review. Surg Endosc 2017;31:
shouldnotbeaimedatproducingidenticalresults,but 2050–71.
8. Pecorelli N,Hershorn O,Baldini G,et al. Impact of adher-
rather this pilot study establishes the framework on
ence to care pathway interventions on recovery following bowel
which similar systems can be developed customized
resectionwithinanestablishedenhancedrecoveryprogram.Surg
toeachpopulation’sneeds.ThePROscapturedbythe
Endosc2017;31:1760–71.
application require further validation compared with
9. Ljungqvist O. ERAS—enhanced recovery after surgery. J
traditional reporting means. Compliance to ERAS(cid:1)
ParenterEnteralNutr2014;38:559–66.
pathway items should also be similarly compared
10. Basch E. Patient-reported outcomes—harnessing patients’
with standard reporting of compliance to establish voicestoimproveclinicalcare.NEnglJMed2017;376:105–8.
validity. 11. BaumhauerJF.Patient-reportedoutcomes—aretheyliving
uptotheirpotential?NEnglJMed2017;377:6–9.
12. Pecorelli N, Fiore JF, Kaneva P, et al. An app for patient
FutureDirection
educationandself-auditwithinanenhancedrecoveryprogramfor
Mobile applications can transform and integrate bowelsurgery:apilotstudyassessingvalidityandusability.Surg
PRO collection across all aspects of a patient’s en- Endosc2018;32:2263–73.
13. Stark PA, Myles PS, Burke JA. Development and psycho-
hanced recovery pathway. The growing emphasis on
prehabilitation for ERAS(cid:1) to improve a patient’s metricevaluationofapostoperativequalityofrecoveryscore:the
QoR-15.Anesthesiology2013;118:1332–40.
physiologic status before surgical intervention creates
14. Cella D, Yount S, Rothrock N, et al. The patient-reported
an excellent opportunity for expansion of real-time
outcomesmeasurementinformationsystem(PROMIS).MedCare
PRO collection. Dynamic feedback can be used to
2007;45:S3–11.
track patient nutrition, physical conditioning, and
15. JonesRS,StukenborgGJ.Patient-reported outcomesmea-
emotional well-being and allow the multidisciplinary surement information system (PROMIS) use in surgical care: a
team to adjust the care plan accordingly. In addition, scopingstudy.JAmCollSurg2017;224:245–54.e1.No. 8 MOBILE APPLICATION FOR PROS IN HPB SURGERY ? Pickens et al. 917
16. KleifJ,WaageJ,ChristensenKB,etal.Systematicreview 22. Cook DJ, Manning DM, Holland DE, et al. Patient en-
of the QoR-15 score, a patient- reported outcome measure mea- gagement and reported outcomes in surgical recovery: effec-
suring quality of recovery after surgery and anaesthesia. Br J tiveness of an e-health platform. J Am Coll Surg 2013;217:
Anaesth2018;120:28–36. 648–55.
17. GustafssonUO,ScottMJ,SchwenkW,etal.Guidelinesfor 23. Marcano Belisario JS, Jamsek J, Huckvale K, et al. Com-
perioperative careinelective colonicsurgery:enhancedrecovery parison of self-administered survey questionnaire responses
aftersurgery(ERAS(cid:1))societyrecommendations.ClinNutr2012; collected using mobile apps versus other methods. Cochrane
31:783–800. Database Syst Rev 2015;MR000042. doi:10.1002/14651858.
18. Nygren J, Thacker J, Carli F, et al. Guidelines for peri- MR000042.pub2.
operativecareinelectiverectal/pelvicsurgery:enhancedrecovery 24. Semple JL, Armstrong KA. Mobile applications for post-
after surgery (ERAS(cid:1)) society recommendations. World J Surg operativemonitoringafterdischarge.CanMedAssocJ2017;189:
2013;37:285–305. E22–4.
19. Cerantola Y, Valerio M, Persson B, et al. Guidelines for 25. Debono B, Bousquet P, Sabatier P, et al. Postoperative
perioperative care after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer: monitoring with a mobile application after ambulatory lumbar
enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS((cid:1))) society recommen- discectomy:aneffectivetoolforspinesurgeons.EurSpineJ2016;
dations.ClinNutr2013;32:879–87. 25:3536–42.
20. NevilleA,LeeL,AntonescuI,etal.Systematicreviewof 26. ArmstrongKA,CoytePC,BrownM,etal.Effectofhome
outcomes used to evaluate enhanced recovery after surgery. Br J monitoringviamobileapponthenumberofin-personvisitsfol-
Surg2014;101:159–71. lowingambulatorysurgery.JAMASurg2017;152:622.
21. Day RW, Cleeland CS, Wang XS, et al. Patient-reported 27. GunterRL,Fernandes-TaylorS,RahmanS,etal.Feasibility
outcomes accurately measure the value of an enhanced recovery ofanimage-basedmobilehealthprotocolforpostoperativewound
programinliversurgery.JAmCollSurg2015;221:1023–30.e2. monitoring.JAmCollSurg2018;226:277–86.
View publication stats