Consensus statement for perioperative care in lumbar spinal fusion: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations1. 我需要空腹多久？術前6小時開始禁食，術前2小時開始停止喝水Clear fluid should be permitted up to 2 hours and solid foods up to 6 hours before the induction of general anesthesia.2. 術前可以洗澡嗎？要刮毛或做其他準備嗎？不需自行處理There was no clear benefit of chlorhexidine shower at home before surgical preparation.3. 想快點康復可以做什麼嗎？建議早期復健和物理治療出院前需要能自主移動和上下樓梯Early mobilization and early physical therapy are recommended.Before discharge, independent transfer and stair climbing should be achieved4. 有慢性病（如糖尿病、高血壓）會不會影響手術？有任何共病情況都應交由醫師評估Each context needs to be evaluated, related to the patient’s possible comorbidities and the complexity of the procedure.5. 需要吃止痛藥嗎？會上癮嗎？會使用多模式止痛策略並減少使用鴉片類藥物減少成癮的可能The routine preoperative administration of acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and gabapentinoids as part of a multimodal opioid sparing analgesia strategy is recommended.6. 會有什麼術後的併發症嗎？什麼情況下需要回診？可能會有術後尿滯留、泌尿道感染、手術部位感染等併發症。吸煙者、飲酒者可能有呼吸系統、心血管、假性關節、深層靜脈栓塞、術後譫妄、術後腸阻塞等並發症。有呼吸系統、心血管、泌尿道、嚴重疼痛等問題都建議回診評估。Prolonged urinary drainage is associated with complications such as urinary tract infections, surgical site infections, and postoperative urinary retention (POUR) following spine surgeryTobacco smoking is a risk factor for perioperative and postoperative complications such as pulmonary and cardiovascular complications, pseudoarthrosis, worse functional outcomes, deep vein thrombosis, delirium, morbidity, and mortalityComplications associated with alcohol consumption in spinal surgery include pseudarthroses, postoperative infections, cardiopulmonary complications, postoperative ileus, delirium, bleeding episodes, and deep venous thrombosis7. 需要復健嗎？建議早期復健和物理治療一旦可以下床建議盡早開始活動，以減少長期臥床可能帶來的不良生理影響，如肌肉萎縮、血管栓塞等。Early mobilization and early physical therapy are recommended.Patients should be encouraged to mobilize as soon as they are able, to counteract the adverse physiological effects associated with prolonged bed rest (such as insulin resistance, muscle atrophy, reduced pulmonary function, impaired tissue oxygenation, and increased risk of thromboembolism)8. 如何減少術後疼痛？術後使用傷口滲透注射(Wound infiltration)可以有效降低術後疼痛A prospective cohort study showed wound infiltration (WI) to effectively reduce postoperative pain after lumbar fusion沒特別提要不要先停用藥物？會留下疤痕嗎？有辦法減輕嗎？會住院幾天？需要有人陪同嗎？如果感冒或身體不舒服，手術會延期嗎？